The 9th AI Safety Camp (AISC9) just ended, and as usual, it was a success! Follow this link to find project summaries, links to their outputs, recordings to the end of camp presentations and contact info to all our teams in case you want to engage more. AISC9 both had the largest number of participants (159) and the smallest number of staff (2) of all the camps we’ve done so far. Me and Remmelt have proven that if necessary, we can do this with just the two of us, and luckily our fundraising campaign raised just enough money to pay me and Remmelt to do one more AISC. After that, the future is more uncertain, but that’s almost always the case for small non profit projects. Get involved in AISC10 AISC10 will follow the same format and timeline (shifted by one year) as AISC9. Approximate timeline August: Planning and preparation for the organisers September: Research lead applications are open October: We help the research lead applicants improve their project proposals November: Team member applications are open December: Research leads interviews and select their team Mid-January to Mid April: The camp itself, i.e. each team works on their project. Help us give feedback on the next round of AISC projects An important part of AISC is that we give individual feedback on all project proposals we receive. This is very staff intensive and the biggest bottleneck in our system. If you’re interested in helping with giving feedback on proposals in certain research areas, please email me at linda.linsefors@gmail.com . Apply as a research lead – Applications will open in September As an AISC research lead, you will both plan and lead your project. The AISC staff, and any volunteer helpers (see previous section) will provide you with feedback on your project proposal. If your project proposal is accepted, we’ll help you recruit a team to help you realise your plans. We’ll broadcast your project, together with all the other accepted project proposals. We’ll provide structure and guidance for the team recruitment. You will choose which applications you think are promising, do the interviews and the final selection for your project team. If you are unsure if this is for you, you’re welcome to contact Remmelt ( remmelt@aisafety.camp ) specifically for stop/pause AI projects, or me ( linda.linsefors@gmail.com ) for anything else. Apply as a team member – Applications will open in November Approximately at the start of November, we’ll share all the accepted project proposals on our website. If you have some time to spare in January-April 2025, you should read them and apply to the projects you like. We have room for more funding Our stipends pot is empty or very close to empty (accounting for AISC9 is not finalised), if you want to help rectify this by adding some more money, please contact remmelt@aisafety.camp . If we get some funding for this, but not enough for everyone, we will prioritise giving stipends to people from low and mid income countries, because we believe that a little money goes a long way for these participants.