(Cross-posted from my website ) I’ve written a report about whether advanced AIs will fake alignment during training in order to get power later – a behavior I call “scheming” (also sometimes called “deceptive alignment”). The report is available on arXiv here . There’s also an audio version here , and I’ve included the introductory section below (with audio for that section here ). This section includes a full summary of the report, which covers most of the main points and technical terminology. I’m hoping that the summary will provide much of the context necessary to understand individual sections of the report on their own. Abstract This report examines whether advanced AIs that perform well in training will be doing so in order to gain power later – a behavior I call “scheming” (also sometimes called “deceptive alignment”). I conclude that scheming is a disturbingly plausible outcome of using baseline machine learning methods to train goal-directed AIs sophisticated enough to scheme (my subjective probability on such an outcome, given these conditions, is ~25%). In particular: if performing well in training is a good strategy for gaining power (as I think it might well be), then a very wide variety of goals would motivate scheming – and hence, good training performance. This makes it plausible that training might either land on such a goal naturally and then reinforce it, or actively push a model’s motivations towards such a goal as an easy way of improving performance. What’s more, because schemers pretend to be aligned on tests designed to reveal their motivations, it may be quite difficult to tell whether this has occurred. However, I also think there are reasons for comfort. In particular: scheming may not actually be such a good strategy for gaining power; various selection pressures in training might work against schemer-like goals (for example, relative to non-schemers, schemers need to engage in extra instrumental reasoning, which might harm their training performance); and we may be able to increase such pressures intentionally. The report discusses these and a wide variety of other considerations in detail, and it suggests an array of empirical research directions for probing the topic further. 0. Introduction Agents seeking power often have incentives to deceive others about their
motives. Consider, for example, a politician on the campaign trail ("I
care deeply about your pet issue"), a job candidate ("I'm just so
excited about widgets"), or a child seeking a parent's pardon ("I'm
super sorry and will never do it again"). This report examines whether we should expect advanced AIs whose motives
seem benign during training to be engaging in this form of deception.
Here I distinguish between four (increasingly specific) types of
deceptive AIs: Alignment fakers : AIs pretending to be more aligned than they
are. [1] Training gamers : AIs that understand the process being used to
train them (I'll call this understanding "situational awareness"),
and that are optimizing for what I call "reward on the episode"
(and that will often have incentives to fake alignment, if doing so
would lead to reward). [2] Power-motivated instrumental training-gamers (or "schemers") :
AIs that are training-gaming specifically in order to gain power for
themselves or other AIs later. [3] Goal-guarding schemers: Schemers whose power-seeking strategy
specifically involves trying to prevent the training process from
modifying their goals. I think that advanced AIs fine-tuned on uncareful human feedback are
likely to fake alignment in various ways by default, because uncareful
feedback will reward such behavior. [4] And plausibly, such AIs will
play the training game as well. But my interest, in this report, is
specifically in whether they will do this as part of a strategy for
gaining power later – that is, whether they will be schemers (this sort
of behavior is often called "deceptive alignment" in the literature,
though I won't use that term here). [5] I aim to clarify and evaluate
the arguments for and against expecting this. My current view is that scheming is a worryingly plausible outcome of
training advanced, goal-directed AIs using baseline machine learning
methods (for example: self-supervised pre-training followed by RLHF on
a diverse set of real-world tasks). [6] The most basic reason for
concern, in my opinion, is that: Performing well in training may be a good instrumental strategy for
gaining power in general. If it is, then a very wide variety of goals would motivate scheming
(and hence good training performance); whereas the non-schemer goals
compatible with good training performance are much more specific. The combination of (1) and (2) makes it seem plausible, to me, that
conditional on training creating a goal-directed, situationally-aware
model, it might well instill a schemer-like goal for one reason or
another. In particular: Training might land on such a goal "naturally" (whether before or
after situational awareness arises), because such a goal initially
leads to good-enough performance in training even absent
training-gaming. (And this especially if you're intentionally trying
to induce your model to optimize over long time horizons, as I think
there will be incentives to do.) Even if schemer-like goals don't arise "naturally," actively turning a model into a schemer may be the easiest way for SGD to
improve the model's training performance, once the model has the
situational awareness to engage in training-gaming at all. [7] What's more, because schemers actively pretend to be aligned on tests
designed to reveal their motivations, it may be quite difficult to tell
whether this has occurred. [8] That seems like reason for serious
concern. [9] However, I also think that there are reasons for comfort. I'll group
these into two categories. The first category centers on the possibility that scheming isn't
actually a very convergently-good instrumental strategy. For example: the most common story about schemers focuses on goal-guarding schemers, which are training-gaming in order to
prevent their goals from being modified by the training process. But
it's not clear to me that this will work well enough (in particular:
goal-modification might continue despite training-gaming [10] ), or
that the resulting goals will get sufficiently large amounts of
future power, with sufficiently high probability, to justify any
costs the model is incurring by training-gaming rather than just
going for its goals directly (if these costs are meaningful – which
for some models they might not be). There are alternative stories about why scheming will be a good
instrumental strategy – stories, for example, that center on
coordination amongst AIs with different values; on the possibility
that AIs will have quite similar values by default; and on the
possibility that AIs will intrinsically value things like "my
survival" (in a manner tolerant of values-change) and/or "AI
empowerment" (in a manner tolerant of very different values in the
AIs-so-empowered). And while these stories do make scheming seem
like a more disjunctive hypothesis, to me, a number of them seem to
me some combination of (a) more speculative and (b) requiring that
we posit models with much more specific sorts of goals (thereby
dulling the force of (2) above). [11] The second category centers on forms of selection pressure that may push against scheming – both "naturally," and because we may be able to
intentionally introduce/emphasize these selection pressures in training. For example: relative to other sorts of models, schemers need to
engage in extra instrumental reasoning (e.g., backchaining from
their long-term goal to the instrumental value of training-gaming,
and checking for escape/defection opportunities). This may come at a
substantive cost to their performance – a cost we may be able to
intentionally increase by e.g. putting models under more time
pressure, forcing them to rely on human-legible scratch-pads for
their reasoning, and making genuine escape/defection opportunities
more difficult to distinguish from traps. And to the extent that
schemers engage in active attempts to undermine human alignment and
security efforts while still under human control (the scariest form
of scheming, in my view), their performance seems likely to take a
more notable hit. What's more, my own guess is that the costs of this extra
instrumental reasoning substantially outweigh what are sometimes
called the "simplicity" benefits of scheming – i.e., benefits from
the fact that selecting a schemer allows SGD to select a simpler
goal (since it has such a wide variety to choose from). And this
especially given that schemers and non-schemers alike will need to
represent concepts like "honesty," "human values," "reward," and so
on in detail – so schemers plausibly save on complexity only via
differences in the complexity of using/repurposing/"pointing at" a
given concept in guiding a model's motivations. Also: prior to situational awareness, training will actively penalize schemer-like goals whenever they lead to a sacrifice of
reward on the episode (more about what I mean by "episode" below).
And we can try to actively push in this direction further –
especially if we can learn to detect and control when situational
awareness arises. I think the second category, here, is especially important. In
particular: one way that arguments that appeal to the comparative number
(and/or "measure") of schemer-like goals vs. non-schemer goals that
perform well in training can go wrong is by neglecting the full power of
the selection pressure being applied to the goal that training selects.
So if the pressure applied in training works against schemers overall,
this is very good news. [12] The full report discusses these and a wide variety of other relevant
considerations in much more detail (and see section 0.2 for a full summary). Overall, as a rough stab at quantifying my current view: if you train
a coherently goal-directed, situationally aware,
somewhat-better-than-human-level model using baseline forms of
self-supervised pre-training + RLHF on diverse, long-horizon, real-world
tasks, my subjective probability is ~25% that this model will be performing
well in training in substantial part as part of an instrumental strategy
for seeking power for itself and/or other AIs later. [13] I also think it may be possible to reduce the risk here in fairly
simple ways: for example, via training on shorter-horizon tasks, or
via more intensive forms of adversarial training prior to
situational awareness. And I think the risk increases with more powerful models, who may
be better positioned to escape/take-over (and to
coordinate/cooperate with other AIs in doing so). [14] Also, and importantly: non-schemers can engage in schemer-like behavior,
too. For example: Models that are only optimizing for reward on a given episode can
fake their alignment (or even: engage in escape/take-over) in an
effort to get that reward (especially if the episode in question is
quite long). Models that aren't playing the training game can still end up with
power-seeking goals that incentivize various forms of deception. The eventual AIs that matter most might differ in important ways
from the paradigm sort of AI I focus on here – for example, they
might be more like " language model
agents " than
single models, [15] or they might be created via methods that differ
even more substantially from sort of baseline ML methods I'm focused
on – while still engaging in power-motivated alignment-faking. So scheming as I've defined it is far from the only concern in this
vicinity. Rather, it's a paradigm instance of this sort of concern, and
one that seems, to me, especially pressing to understand. At the end of
the report, I discuss an array of possible empirical research directions
for probing the topic further. 0.1 Preliminaries (This section offers a few more preliminaries to frame the report's
discussion. Those eager for the main content can skip to the summary of
the report in section 0.2.) I wrote this report centrally because I think that the probability of
scheming/"deceptive alignment" is one of the most important questions in
assessing the overall level of existential risk from misaligned AI.
Indeed, scheming is notably central to many models of how this risk
arises. [16] And as I discuss below, I think it's the scariest form that
misalignment can take. Yet: for all its importance to AI risk, the topic has received
comparatively little direct public attention. [17] And my sense is that
discussion of it often suffers from haziness about the specific pattern
of motivation/behavior at issue, and why one might or might not expect
it to occur. [18] My hope, in this report, is to lend clarity to
discussion of this kind, to treat the topic with depth and detail
commensurate to its importance, and to facilitate more ongoing research.
In particular, and despite the theoretical nature of the report, I'm
especially interested in informing empirical investigation that might
shed further light. I've tried to write for a reader who isn't necessarily familiar with any
previous work on scheming/"deceptive alignment." For example: in sections 1.1 and
1.2, I lay out, from the
ground up, the taxonomy of concepts that the discussion will rely
on. [19] For some readers, this may feel like re-hashing old ground. I
invite those readers to skip ahead as they see fit (especially if
they've already read the summary of the report, and so know what they're
missing). That said, I do assume more general familiarity with (a) the basic
arguments about existential risk from misaligned AI, [20] and (b) a
basic picture of how contemporary machine learning works. [21] And I
make some other assumptions as well, namely: That the relevant sort of AI development is taking place within a
machine learning-focused paradigm (and a socio-political
environment) broadly similar to that of 2023. [22] That we don't have strong "interpretability tools" (i.e., tools that
help us understand a model's internal cognition) that could help us
detect/prevent scheming. [23] That the AIs I discuss are goal-directed in the sense of:
well-understood as making and executing plans, in pursuit of
objectives, on the basis of models of the world. [24] (I don't think
this assumption is innocuous, but I want to separate debates about
whether to expect goal-directedness per se from debates about
whether to expect goal-directed models to be schemers – and I
encourage readers to do so as well. [25] ) Finally, I want to note an aspect of the discussion in the report that
makes me quite uncomfortable: namely, it seems plausible to me that in
addition to potentially posing existential risks to humanity, the sorts
of AIs discussed in the report might well be moral patients in their own
right. [26] I talk, here, as though they are not, and as though it is
acceptable to engage in whatever treatment of AIs best serves our ends.
But if AIs are moral patients, this is not the case – and when one finds
oneself saying (and especially: repeatedly saying) "let's assume, for
the moment, that it's acceptable to do whatever we want to x category
of being, despite the fact that it's plausibly not," one should sit up
straight and wonder. I am here setting aside issues of AI moral
patienthood not because they are unreal or unimportant, but because they
would introduce a host of additional complexities to an already-lengthy
discussion. But these complexities are swiftly descending upon us, and
we need concrete plans for handling them responsibly. [27] 0.2 Summary of the report This section gives a summary of the full report. It includes most of the
main points and technical terminology (though unfortunately, relatively
few of the concrete examples meant to make the content easier to
understand). [28] I'm hoping it will (a) provide readers with a good
sense of which parts of the main text will be most of interest to them,
and (b) empower readers to skip to those parts without worrying too much
about what they've missed. 0.2.1 Summary of section 1 The report has four main parts. The first part (section 1) aims to clarify the
different forms of AI deception above (section 1.1), to distinguish schemers from
the other possible model classes I'll be discussing (section 1.2), and to explain why I
think that scheming is a uniquely scary form of misalignment (section 1.3). I'm especially interested in contrasting schemers with: Reward-on-the-episode seekers : that is, AI systems that
terminally value some component of the reward process for the
episode, and that are playing the training game for this reason. Training saints : AI systems that are directly pursuing the goal
specified by the reward process (I'll call this the "specified
goal"). [29] Misgeneralized non-training-gamers : AIs that are neither playing
the training game nor pursuing the specified goal. [30] Here's a diagram of overall taxonomy: All of these model classes can be misaligned and dangerous. [31] But I
think schemers are especially scary. In particular: scheming prompts the
most robust and adversarial efforts to prevent humans from learning
about the misalignment in question [32] ; and it's the most likely to
motivate what I call "early undermining" – that is, AIs at a
comparatively early stage of AI development actively trying to undermine
human efforts to align, control, and secure future AI systems. [33] I also discuss (in section 1.4) whether theoretical arguments of the type the report focuses on are even
useful to consider. My answer here is "somewhat useful," both to inform
empirical investigation and as a source of evidence in the absence of
adequate empirical data, but we should clearly be looking for as much
empirical evidence as we can (I offer some suggestions in this vein in section 6). In section 1.5, I discuss a factor that seems to me
important in assessing various of the arguments I consider: namely, the
amount of "slack" that training gives AIs to perform
less-than-optimally. 0.2.2 Summary of section 2 The second part of the report examines the prerequisites for scheming.
In particular, I focus on: Situational awareness: the model understands that it's a model
in a training process, what the training process will reward, and
the basic nature of the objective world in general. Beyond-episode goals: the model cares about the consequences of
its actions after the episode is complete. Aiming at reward-on-the-episode as part of a power-motivated
instrumental strategy: the model believes that its beyond-episode
goals will be better achieved if it optimizes for
reward-on-the-episode – and in particular, that it, or some other
AIs, will get more power if it does this. Section 2.1 discusses situational awareness. I think that absent active effort, we
should at least expect certain kinds of advanced AIs – for example,
advanced AIs that are performing real-world tasks in live interaction
with the public internet – to be situationally aware by default, because
(a) situational awareness is very useful in performing the tasks in
question (indeed, we might actively train it into them), and (b) such
AIs will likely be exposed to the information necessary to gain such
awareness. However, I don't focus much on situational awareness in the
report. Rather, I'm more interested in whether to expect the other two
prerequisites above in situationally-aware models. Section 2.2 discusses beyond-episode goals. Here I distinguish (in section 2.2.1) between two concepts of an
"episode," namely: The incentivized episode : that is, the temporal horizon that the
gradients in training actively pressure the model to optimize
over. [34] The intuitive episode : that is, some other intuitive temporal
unit that we call the "episode" for one reason or another (e.g.,
reward is given at the end of it; actions in one such unit have no
obvious causal path to outcomes in another; etc). When I use the term "episode" in the report, I'm talking about the
incentivized episode. Thus, "beyond-episode goals" means: goals whose
temporal horizon extends beyond the horizon that training actively
pressures models to optimize over. But very importantly, the
incentivized episode isn't necessarily the intuitive episode. That is,
deciding to call some temporal unit an "episode" doesn't mean that
training isn't actively pressuring the model to optimize over a horizon
that extends beyond that unit: you need to actually look in detail at
how the gradients flow (work that I worry casual readers of this report
might neglect). [35] I also distinguish (in section 2.2.2) between two types of
beyond-episode goals, namely: Training-game- independent beyond-episode goals : that is,
beyond-episode goals that arise independent of their role in
motivating a model to play the training game. Training-game- dependent beyond-episode goals : that is,
beyond-episode goals that arise specifically because they motivate
training-gaming. These two sorts of beyond-episode goals correspond to two different
stories about how scheming happens. In the first sort of story, SGD happens to instill beyond-episode
goals in a model "naturally" (whether before situational awareness
arises, or afterwards), and then those goals begin to motivate
scheming. [36] In the second sort of story, SGD "notices" that giving a model
beyond-episode goals would motivate scheming (and thus,
high-reward behavior), and so actively gives it such goals for
this reason. [37] This second story makes most sense if you assume that situational
awareness is already in place. [38] So we're left with the following
three main paths to scheming: [39] In section 2.2.2.1, I discuss
training-game-independent beyond-episode goals (that is, path 1 and 2).
Should we expect beyond-episode goals to arise "naturally"? One reason to expect this is that plausibly, goals don't come with
temporal limitations by default – and "model time" might differ from
"calendar time" regardless. One reason to not expect this is that training will actively punish beyond-episode goals whenever they prompt the model to
sacrifice reward-on-the-episode for some beyond-episode benefit. And
we may be able to use adversarial training to search out such goals
and punish them more actively. In section 2.2.2.2, I discuss
training-game- dependent beyond-episode goals. In particular, I
highlight the question of whether SGD will be adequately able to
"notice" the benefits of turning a non-schemer into a schemer, given the
need to make the transition incrementally, via tiny changes to the
model's weights, each of which improve the reward. I think that this is
a serious objection to stories focused on training-game-dependent
beyond-episode goals, but I also don't feel that I can confidently rule
out SGD's ability to make a transition of this kind (see e.g. " you
can't evolve eyes "
as an example of places I think intuitions in this vein can go wrong). I also discuss, in section 2.2.3, the possibility that the
model's goal-directedness will be "messy" in a way that complicates
training-game-dependent stories where SGD can simply modify a model's
goal and thereby smoothly redirect its "goal-achieving engine" in a new
direction (I think that this sort of "messiness" is quite likely). And I
touch on a broader intuition that scheming requires an unusually
high-standard of goal-directedness more generally. I think this
intuition has less force once we condition on the sort of
goal-directedness typically assumed in the alignment discourse (and
which I generally assume in the report as well). [40] But it's relevant
to our overall probabilities regardless. In section 2.2.4,
I discuss whether beyond-episode goals are more likely in models
actively trained to have long-term (even if still: within-episode)
goals. I think that beyond-episode goals are indeed more likely in
models of this kind – and that baseline incentives to create models that
engage in fairly long-horizon optimization (e.g., "make lots of money
for my company over the next year") are correspondingly worrying.
However, I also think various sorts of cognitive work that might be
highly useful to efforts to avoid an AI takeover (for example, research
aimed at improving the alignment, interpretability, and security of our
AI systems) may not require long-horizon optimization of this kind. [41] With this discussion of beyond-episode goals in view, I turn, in section 2.3,
to the final prerequisite for scheming: namely, deciding to
training-game as part of a power-motivated strategy for promoting the
beyond-episode goal in question. Here I focus first (in section 2.3.1) on what I call the
"classic goal-guarding story" about the origins of this decision. We can
decompose this story into two claims: The goal-guarding hypothesis . If the model optimizes for
reward-on-the-episode during training, then the goals that survive
training will be such that the model would want them promoted in the
future; whereas if the model doesn't optimize for
reward-on-the-episode during training, the model will want this
less. Adequate future empowerment. Conditional on surviving training
to the degree at stake in (A), the model's goals will then end up
empowered to a degree (and with sufficient probability) as to
justify (given the model's other goals, its tolerance for risk, etc)
pursuing a strategy of training-gaming overall. I then investigate each of these in turn (in section 2.3.1.1 and 2.3.1.2, respectively). Both seem to me non-obvious. In particular, with respect to the
goal-guarding hypothesis: Even after training gaming starts, the model's cognition is still
being continually tweaked in the direction of better training
performance. And it seems plausible to me that these modifications
will continue to affect a model's goals as well – especially if its
goals are not cleanly distinguishable from its capabilities, but
rather are implemented by a tangled kludge of local heuristics,
patterns of attention, impulses, and so on. Thus, as a toy example: imagine that if I go into the desert and
stack bricks for a million years, I will get a huge amount of
money that I can then donate to my charity of choice. But
suppose that throughout this whole ordeal, my brain will be
hooked up to a machine that continually modifies all my neurons
to encourage actions that stack bricks better, and to discourage
actions that stack bricks worse. And suppose my intention is to
just try to stack bricks as well as I can. Will I emerge from
this process with my values substantially affected by the
relevant brain modifications (such that, for example, I emerge
obsessed with stacking bricks –  or at least, with very
different taste in charities)? It seems at least plausible. On the classic goal-guarding story, once a model starts
training-gaming, the specific content of its goal no longer matters
to its behavior – any other schemer-like goal would lead to the same
thing. But this makes it seem like the goal could "float around"
between schemer-like goals (or get moved by other pressures within
SGD, like regularization), without affecting training performance.
And if that happens, then scheming may not be a good strategy for
goal-guarding after all. [42] Of course, the model may be tolerant of some changes to its
goals – and these changes may be preferable to the ones that would
occur absent training-gaming. But the possibility of significant
ongoing goal-modification introduces an extra uncertainty into the
classic goal-guarding story. People sometimes talk about more sophisticated techniques for
avoiding goal-modification, where e.g. a model manipulates gradient
descent more actively by making its good performance in training
conditional on whether its goals get modified or not (see e.g. the
discourse around " gradient
hacking ").
I don't focus on these methods here, but they strike me as quite
difficult to pull off, especially for only
somewhat-better-than-human-level models. And if scheming requires
that they work, I think it's worth being very clear about that, and
giving the feasibility of such methods commensurate attention. With respect to whether the resulting goals will be adequately
empowered: The most worrying types of schemers aren't merely seeking power on
future training episodes. Rather, they are specifically aiming at
some combination of escape and take-over. But this means that the relevant goals have to do more than just
survive training. They also need to survive either until the model
can either escape/participate in a take-over itself, or to exert
sufficiently substantive influence on some future generation of
models that will be able to do so. For example, if GPT-6 isn't powerful enough to escape/take-over
itself, but GPT-8 will be, then GPT-6's main path to power may
be influencing the values of GPT-7, which in turn influences the
values of GPT-8. But this form of influence is quite indirect;
it may face substantial further barriers from e.g. human
monitoring; and it will plausibly involve more significant
deviation from max-reward training performance. What's more, the relevant escape/take-over attempt needs to be
suitably likely to succeed , to occur over time horizons that the
model cares about, and to result in the model's favored goals in
particular receiving a suitably substantive share of power (despite
the fact that large numbers of AIs with very different values may be
competing for the power in question). These uncertainties introduce haircuts to the instrumental value of
a schemer-like strategy. However, the importance of these haircuts
depends on the burden of proof that such a strategy needs to meet.
In particular: the more the model stands to gain from not training-gaming, the more attractive scheming will need to be in
order to win out as a strategy. But for some models, the costs of
training-gaming might be relatively low. And for suitably
"ambitious" models, even low-probabilities of success via a
schemer-like strategy might justify even a substantive sacrifice. Overall, the classic goal-guarding story seems to me to introduce a
number of additional uncertainties with respect to the viability of
scheming as an instrumental strategy. However, it's also not the only story available. In section 2.3.2, I consider a number of "non-classic"
stories, which relax various of the classic story's constraints. For
example: AI coordination . If AIs with different values coordinate to
share power after take-over, and/or to compensate AIs who worked on
behalf of take-over but who weren't powerful enough to
escape/take-over themselves, then this might mitigate some of the
haircuts above. For example, GPT-6 might be more willing to work on
GPT-8's behalf in the example above, if GPT-6 were confident that
GPT-8 would "repay the favor" once in power. I think some analyses
of coordination of this form assume too readily that it will be (a)
easy, and (b) the obvious strategy relative to e.g. coordinating
with humans instead (especially for only-somewhat-better-than-human
neural nets acting in a still-human-controlled world where
interpretability is still unsolved for everyone ). But I think that
AI coordination of this type is a real concern and worth serious
attention – both in the context of scheming in particular, and in
the context of AI risk more generally. AIs with similar values by default . Relatedly, if AIs will
generally have sufficiently similar values by default, this can
reduce the need for a schemer to specifically propagate its own
goals into the future, and free it up to work on behalf of AI
take-over/empowerment more directly. And it does seem likely that
e.g. GPT-6's values and GPT-8's values will be at least much more similar, by default, than e.g. GPT-6's values and a given set of
human values. Terminal values that happen to favor escape/takeover . We can
also imagine models with terminal values that happen to favor
escape/AI takeover even if the goals that get empowered as a result
aren't very similar to the model's own. For example, perhaps the
model values some concept of "survival" based on a conception of
personal identity tolerant of the sorts of goal changes that
training will cause; or perhaps the model just supports something
like "AI empowerment," even if the AIs-so-empowered won't have
values very similar to its own. However, some stories of this form
begin to impose fairly strong constraints on the goals that schemers
need to have, thereby undermining one of the key arguments for
scheming: namely, that it seems like a convergently-good strategy
across a wide variety of goals. (I also consider a few other alternative stories – namely, models with
false beliefs about the instrumental value of scheming, models that are
self-deceived about their alignment, and models that are uncertain about
their goals/hazy about exactly why they want power. But these seem to me
less important.) The availability of non-classic stories like these makes the case for
scheming feel, to me, more disjunctive. However, some of these stories
also seem to me some combination of (a) more speculative, and (b)
requiring of more specific hypotheses about the sorts of goals that AIs
will develop. My overall takeaways from section 2 are: I think there are relatively strong arguments for expecting
situational awareness by default, at least in certain types of AI
systems (i.e., AI systems performing real-world tasks in live
interaction with sources of information about who they are). But I feel quite a bit less clear about beyond-episode goals and
aiming-at-reward-on-the-episode-as-part-a-power-motivated-instrumental-strategy. I then turn, in the next two sections, to an examination of the more
specific arguments for and against expecting schemers vs. other types of
models. I divide these into two categories, namely: Arguments that focus on the path that SGD needs to take in
building the different model classes in question (section 3). Arguments that focus on the final properties of the different
model classes in question
(section 4). [43] 0.2.3 Summary of section 3 The third part of the report focuses on the former category of argument. I break this category down according to the distinction between
"training-game- independent " and "training-game- dependent "
beyond-episode goals. My sense is that the most traditional story about
the path to schemers focuses on the former sort. It runs roughly as
follows: Because of [insert reason], the model will develop a (suitably
ambitious) beyond-episode goal correlated with good performance in
training (in a manner that doesn't route via the training game).
This could happen before situational awareness arrives, or
afterwards. Then, in conjunction with situational awareness, this (suitably
ambitious) beyond-episode goal will start to motivate
training-gaming. Modulo my questions about the viability of scheming as an instrumental
strategy, I take this sort of argument fairly seriously. I think the
most immediate question is: why did the model develop this sort of
beyond-episode goal? I discussed some reasons for and against expecting
this already (in the summary of
section 2.2.2.1), but they
don't seem to me decisive in either direction: and especially given that
a very wide variety of goals could in principle motivate scheming, it
just does seem possible for a schemer-like goal to pop out of training
in this way. And while it may be possible to use adversarial training
prior to situational awareness to try to prevent this, this training
faces a number of barriers as well (e.g., it needs to be
diverse/thorough enough, it needs to contend with difficulties
knowing/controlling when a model develops situational awareness, and in
some cases models might already have situational awareness by the time
we're worried about the beyond-episode goal developing). So I think this
sort of path to scheming is a real concern. (See
section 3.1 for more.) I then turn, in
section 3.2, to a story focused on
training-game- dependent beyond-episode goals, which runs roughly as
follows: By the time the model becomes situationally aware, it probably won't
be pursuing a max-reward goal (that is, a goal pursuit of which on
the training data leads to roughly the maximum reward consistent
with the model's other capabilities). [44] Rather, it will be
pursuing some less-than-max-reward proxy goal. But at that point, the world-model will contain all the information
the model needs in order to training-game. (However, because we're
here focused on "training-game- dependent " stories about scheming,
we assume that at the point of getting situational awareness, the
model's goal is not yet such that it will motivate
scheming – rather, some further modification would be required for
that.) The easiest way for SGD to modify the model into getting maximum
reward, at that point, will be to make it a schemer. So: SGD will make the model a schemer. [45] If we set aside questions about whether SGD can "notice" the benefits of
modifications of this type, this sort of story seems to me fairly
worrying as well. In particular: I think it's plausible that
schemer-like goals will be sufficiently common in goal-space that one
such goal will be easier for SGD to find, from a given starting point,
than the specific non-schemer goals that leads to max reward behavior. However, non-schemer max-reward goals – for example, the specified goal,
or "reward-on-the-episode" – have some advantages too. For example:
plausibly, the initial phase of training will point the model in their
vicinity by default, since the model, at that stage, needs to be getting
high-reward absent instrumental training-gaming (see
section 3.2.2.2 for more). And to the
extent we're thinking of the model's goal-directedness as "messy," its
heuristics, patterns of attention, impulses, and so on will plausibly be
pointed in this sort of direction as well – thereby plausibly creating
extra "work," on SGD's part, to turn the model into a schemer instead
(see
section 3.2.2.3 for
more). [46] 0.2.4 Summary of section 4 The fourth part of the report examines arguments that focus on the final
properties of the different model classes. I start, in section 4.2, with what I call the "counting
argument." It runs as follows: The non-schemer model classes, here, require fairly specific goals
in order to get high reward. [47] By contrast, the schemer model class is compatible with a very wide
range of (beyond-episode) goals, while still getting high reward (at
least if we assume that the other requirements for scheming to make
sense as an instrumental strategy are in place – e.g., that the
classic goal-guarding story, or some alternative, works). [48] In this sense, there are "more" schemers that get high reward than
there are non-schemers that do so. So, other things equal, we should expect SGD to select a schemer. Something in the vicinity accounts for a substantial portion of my
credence on schemers (and I think it often undergirds other, more
specific arguments for expecting schemers as well). However, the
argument I give most weight to doesn't move immediately from "there are
more possible schemers that get high reward than non-schemers that do
so" to "absent further argument, SGD probably selects a schemer" (call
this the "strict counting argument"), because it seems possible that SGD
actively privileges one of these model classes over the others. [49] Rather, the argument I give most weight to is something like: It seems like there are "lots of ways" that a model could end up a
schemer and still get high reward, at least assuming that scheming
is in fact a good instrumental strategy for pursuing long-term
goals. So absent some additional story about why training won't select a
schemer, it feels, to me, like the possibility should be getting
substantive weight. I call this the "hazy counting argument." It's not especially
principled, but I find that it moves me nonetheless. I then turn, in section 4.3, to "simplicity arguments" in favor of
expecting schemers. I think these arguments sometimes suffer from
unclarity about the sort of simplicity at stake, so in
section 4.3.1, I discuss a number of different
possibilities: "re-writing simplicity" (i.e., the length of the program required to
re-write the algorithm that a model's weights implement in some
programming language, or e.g. on the tape of a given Universal
Turing Machine), "parameter simplicity" (i.e., the number of parameters that the
actual neural network uses to encode the relevant algorithm), " simplicity
realism "
(which assumes that simplicity is in some deep sense an objective
"thing," independent of programming-language or Universal Turing
Machine, that various simplicity metrics attempt to capture), and "trivial simplicity" (which conflates the notion of "simplicity"
with "higher likelihood on priors," in a manner that makes something
like Occam's razor uninterestingly true by definition). I generally focus on "parameter simplicity," which seems to me easiest
to understand, and to connect to a model's training performance. I also briefly discuss, in section 4.3.2, the evidence that SGD
actively selects for simplicity. Here the case that grips me most
directly is just: simplicity (or at least, parameter simplicity) lets a
model save on parameters that it can then use to get more reward. But I
also briefly discuss some other empirical evidence for simplicity biases
in machine learning. [50] Why might we expect a simplicity bias to favor schemers? Roughly: the
thought is that because such a wide variety of goals can motivate
scheming, schemers allow SGD a very wide range of goals to choose from
in seeking out simpler goals; whereas non-schemers (that get high
reward) do not. And this seems especially plausible to the extent we
imagine that the goals required to be such a non-schemer are quite
complex. [51] Other things equal, I think this is right. But I'm not sure it's a very
large or important effect. For one thing: we know that LLMs like GPT-4
are capable of representing a very large number of complex human
concepts with e.g. order of a trillion parameters - including,
plausibly, concepts like "honesty," "helpfulness," "reward," and so on.
So this caps the complexity savings at stake in avoiding representations
like this. [52] Thus, as a toy calculation: if we conservatively assume
that at most 1% of a trillion-parameter model's capacity goes to
representing concepts as complex as "honesty," and that it knows at
least 10,000 such concepts ( Webster's unabridged dictionary has
~500,000
words ),
then representing the concept of honesty takes at most a millionth of
the model's representational capacity, and even less for the larger
models of the future. But more importantly, what matters here isn't the absolute complexity of
representing the different goals in question, but the complexity conditional on already having a good world model . And we should assume
that all of these models will need to understand the specified goal,
the reward process for the episode, etc. [53] And granted such an
assumption, the extra complexity costs of actively optimizing for
the specified goal, or for reward-on-the-episode, seem to me plausibly
extremely small. Plausibly, they're just: whatever the costs are for
using/repurposing ("pointing at") that part of the world-model for
guiding the model's motivations. Of course, we can try to rerun the same simplicity argument at the level
of the complexity costs of using/repurposing different parts of the
world model in that way. For example, we can say: "however this process
works, presumably it's simpler to do for some goals than others – so
given how many schemer-like goals there are, plausibly it will be
simpler to do for some schemer-like goal." I think this is the strongest
form of the simplicity argument for expecting schemers. But it also
requires abandoning any intuitive grip we might've had on which goals
are "simple" in the relevant sense. [54] And it seems plausible to me
that the simplicity differences between different "pointers" are very
small relative to the model's overall capacity. [55] I also discuss, in section 4.3.5,
whether simplicity arguments make plausible predictions about the sorts
of goals a schemer will end up with. In particular: some versions of
these arguments can seem to predict that schemers are likely to end up
with extremely simple long-term goals, regardless of whether those
goals had any relation to what was salient or important during training
-- predictions about which I, personally, am skeptical. [56] Of course,
it's also possible to posit that goal targets salient/relevant during
training will also be "simpler" for the model to pursue. [57] But if we
grant some story in this vein (I haven't heard strong arguments for
doing so), note that it also speaks in favor of the simplicity of the
specified goal, and of reward-on-the-episode, as well - since these are especially salient/relevant during the training process. [58] In section 4.4, I turn to arguments against scheming
that focus on the final properties of the different model classes. Here,
the main argument I'm aware of is that schemers need to do extra
reasoning that other model classes don't (these are sometimes called
"speed costs" – though I think they could in principle affect the
complexity of a model's algorithm as well). In particular: Deciding to training-game : The model needs to reason backwards
from "I want this beyond-episode thing" to "I should do well in
training," in a way that draws on the model's predictions about what
doing well in training will entail (e.g., re: goal-guarding,
take-over prospects, and so on). Checking whether it's time to escape/take-over: The model needs
to be checking, with adequate frequency and accuracy, whether it's
in a position to escape/take-over (and to succeed in this assessment
despite human efforts to trap/fool the model into revealing its true
colors – for example, by offering it apparent opportunities to
defect). [59] (Optional, but relevant to how scary the schemer is) Early
undermining : To the extent the model is doing anything (other than
training-gaming) to support a take-over/escape prior to escaping
human control, [60] it will need to be using cognitive resources
both in (a) performing the relevant nefarious actions and (b) making
sure it gets away with them (e.g., checking that it won't get
caught, coming up with excuses, making the cover stories consistent
even when under scrutiny, and so on). How big are the costs of this reasoning? I think that (I) may well be
fairly easy, but (II) seems more plausibly onerous (especially in the
context of active efforts by humans to put the models under
time-pressure, and make genuine escape/take-over opportunities difficult
to distinguish from traps). [61] And (III), if the model goes for it,
seems like it could be quite difficult – and like it would often
actively require deviation from the highest-reward sorts of training
performance. [62] More importantly, though: the question – at least in the context of a
comparison between the final properties of the model classes – isn't the
absolute size of the costs in question, but rather their size relative
to the simplicity benefits of scheming . Here, my current take is that
the costs of the instrumental reasoning seem larger than the benefits of
the simpler goal. This is mostly an intuitive judgment, but we can also try to hazily
quantify the comparison. Thus, for example, suppose that our model is a purely feedforward
network with 1000 layers and <10,000 serial steps per input, that
the instrumental reasoning at stake just in a schemer deciding to
training-game (let alone: checking for defection opportunities)
takes at least ten steps, and that the model doesn't begin
optimizing for reward-on-the-episode until that reasoning is
complete. In that case, the instrumental reasoning is using up
around .1% of the compute that could be going to getting
reward-on-the-episode, or to some other max-reward goal. [63] Are the complexity costs of representing, or pointing at, a more
complicated goal likely to outweigh this? My guess is no. For
example, if we follow my (conservative, in my opinion) calculation
above and assume that representing (or pointing at) a concept like
"honesty" costs at most a millionth of a trillion parameter models
parameters (and less for a larger model), then a .0001% reduction in
parameters would need to outweigh a .1% reduction in compute – and
absent further argument, it seems strange, to me, to expect this. Of course, this is only a toy calculation, of unclear applicability to
the real-world case. [64] The broader point is just: if serial-time
thinking is scarce for a model (as it plausibly is for a transformer),
the sorts of instrumental reasoning at stake in scheming seem like they
could well substantively impact a model's performance. My guess is that
the complexity costs of non-schemer goals are minor in comparison. I also briefly discuss, in section 4.4.3,
whether we can actively shape our training processes to bias more
heavily towards "speed." Here it seems relatively straightforward to do
things like put models under more time pressure, limit their compute
access, force them to plan via human-legible scratch-pads rather than
via internal processes, and to put effort into making our attempts to
trap them/trip-them-up more sophisticated (and so: more requiring of
cognition to detect). But any efforts in this vein will need to avoid
over-large costs to competitiveness overall (though if you buy that the
speed costs of scheming are quite a bit more substantive than the
simplicity benefits, then so long as speed matters somewhat relative
to simplicity, this might be enough). Section 4.5 briefly discusses whether some analog of "intrinsic passion for a given
task" might make a difference to AI performance, especially in the
context of a form of "messy goal-directedness" that blurs the line
between an AI's capabilities and its values. I find considerations in
this vein interesting, but quite speculative. Section 4.6 discusses the relevance of "slack" in training to evaluating how much
weight to put on factors like the simplicity benefits and speed costs of
scheming. In particular: especially in a high-slack regime, it seems
plausible that these factors are in the noise relative to other
considerations. 0.2.5 Summary of section 5 The first four sections of the report are the main content. sums up my
overall take. I've already summarized most of this in the introduction
above, and I won't repeat that content here. However, I'll add a few
points that the introduction didn't include. In particular: I think some version of the "counting argument"
undergirds most of the other arguments for expecting scheming that I'm
aware of (or at least, the arguments I find most compelling). That is:
schemers are generally being privileged as a hypothesis because a very
wide variety of goals could in principle lead to scheming, thereby
making it easier to (a) land on one of them naturally, (b) land "nearby"
one of them, or (c) find one of them that is "simpler" than non-schemer
goals that need to come from a more restricted space. In this sense, the
case for schemers mirrors one of the most basic arguments for expecting
misalignment more generally – e.g., that alignment is a very narrow
target to hit in goal-space. Except, here, we are specifically incorporating the selection we know we are going to do on the goals in
question: namely, they need to be such as to cause models pursuing them
to get high reward. And the most basic worry is just that: this isn't
enough. Because of the centrality of "counting arguments" to the case for
schemers, I think that questions about the strength of the selection
pressure against schemers – for example, because of the costs of the
extra reasoning schemers have to engage in – are especially important.
In particular: I think a key way that "counting arguments" can go wrong
is by neglecting the power that active selection can have in overcoming
the "prior" set by the count in question. For example: the reason we
can overcome the prior of "most arrangements of car parts don't form a
working car," or "most parameter settings in this neural network don't
implement a working chatbot," is that the selection power at stake in
human engineering, and in SGD, is that strong . So if SGD's selection
power is actively working against schemers (and/or: if we can cause it
to do so more actively), this might quickly overcome a "counting
argument" in their favor. For example: if there are 2 100 schemer-like goals for every non-schemer goal, this might make it seem
very difficult to hit a non-schemer goal in the relevant space. But
actually, 100 bits of selection pressure can be cheap for SGD (consider,
for example, 100 extra gradient updates, each worth at least a halving
of the remaining possible goals). [65] Overall, when I step back and try to look at the considerations in the
report as a whole, I feel pulled in two different directions: On the one hand, at least conditional on scheming being a
convergently-good instrumental strategy, schemer-like goals feel
scarily common in goal-space, and I feel pretty worried that
training will run into them for one reason or another. On the other hand, ascribing a model's good performance in training
to scheming continues to feel, at a gut level, like a fairly
specific and conjunctive story to me. That is, scheming feels robust and common at the level of "goal space,"
and yet specific and fairly brittle at the level of "yes, that's what's
going on with this real-world model, it's getting reward because (or:
substantially because) it wants power for itself/other AIs later, and
getting reward now helps with that." [66] When I try to roughly balance
out these two different pulls (and to condition on goal-directedness and
situational-awareness), I get something like the 25% number I listed
above. 0.2.6 Summary of section 6 I close the report, in section 6, with
a discussion of empirical work that I think might shed light on
scheming. (I also think there's worthwhile theoretical work to be done
in this space, and I list a few ideas in this respect as well. But I'm
especially excited about empirical work.) In particular, I discuss: Empirical work on situational awareness (section 6.1) Empirical work on beyond-episode goals
(section 6.2) Empirical work on the viability of scheming as an instrumental
strategy
(section 6.3) The "model organisms" paradigm for studying scheming
(section 6.4) Traps and honest tests
(section 6.5) Interpretability and transparency
(section 6.6) Security, control, and oversight
(section 6.7) Some other miscellaneous research topics, i.e., gradient hacking,
exploration hacking, SGD's biases towards simplicity/speed, path
dependence, SGD's "incrementalism," "slack," and the possibility of
learning to intentionally create misaligned non-schemer models – for example, reward-on-the-episode seekers – as a method of
avoiding schemers (section 6.8). All in all, I think there's a lot of useful work to be done. Let's move on, now, from the summary to the main report. "Alignment," here, refers to the safety-relevant properties of an
AI's motivations; and "pretending" implies intentional
misrepresentation. ↩︎ Here I'm using the term "reward" loosely, to refer to whatever
feedback signal the training process uses to calculate the gradients
used to update the model (so the discussion also covers cases in
which the model isn't being trained via RL). And I'm thinking of
agents that optimize for "reward" as optimizing for "performing
well" according to some component of that process. See
section 1.1.2 and
section 1.2.1
for much more detail on what I mean, here. The notion of an
"episode," here, means roughly "the temporal horizon that the
training process actively pressures the model to optimize over,"
which may be importantly distinct from what we normally think of as
an episode in training. I discuss this in detail in
section 2.2.1. The terms "training game"
and "situational awareness" are from Cotra
(2022) ,
though in places my definitions are somewhat different. ↩︎ The term
" schemers "
comes from Cotra (2021). ↩︎ See Cotra
(2022) for more on this. ↩︎ I think that the term "deceptive alignment" often leads to
confusion between the four sorts of deception listed above. And
also: if the training signal is faulty, then "deceptively aligned"
models need not be behaving in aligned ways even during training
(that is, "training gaming" behavior isn't always "aligned"
behavior). ↩︎ See Cotra
(2022) for more on the sort of training I have in mind. ↩︎ Though this sort of story faces questions about whether SGD would
be able to modify a non-schemer into a schemer via sufficiently incremental changes to the model's weights, each of which improve
reward. See section 2.2.2.2 for
discussion. ↩︎ And this especially if we lack non-behavioral sorts of
evidence – for example, if we can't use interpretability tools to
understand model cognition. ↩︎ There are also arguments on which we should expect scheming
because schemer-like goals can be "simpler" –  since: there are so
many to choose from – and SGD selects for simplicity. I think it's
probably true that schemer-like goals can be "simpler" in some
sense, but I don't give these arguments much independent weight on
top of what I've already said. Much more on this in
section 4.3. ↩︎ More specifically: even after training gaming starts, the model's
cognition is still being continually tweaked in the direction of
better training performance. And it seems plausible to me that these
modifications will continue to affect a model's goals as well
(especially if its goals are not cleanly distinguishable from its
capabilities, but rather are implemented by a tangled kludge of
local heuristics, patterns of attention, impulses, and so on). Also,
the most common story about scheming makes the specific content of a
schemer's goal irrelevant to its behavior once it starts
training-gaming, thereby introducing the possibility that this goal
might "float-around" (or get moved by other pressures within SGD,
like regularization) between schemer-like goals after
training-gaming starts (this is an objection I first heard from
Katja Grace). This possibility creates some complicated possible
feedback loops (see section 2.3.1.1.2 for
more discussion), but overall, absent coordination across possible
schemers, I think it could well be a problem for goal-guarding
strategies. ↩︎ Of these various alternative stories, I'm most worried about (a)
AIs having sufficiently similar motivations by default that
"goal-guarding" is less necessary, and (b) AI coordination. ↩︎ Though: the costs of schemer-like instrumental reasoning could
also end up in the noise relative to other factors influencing the
outcome of training. And if training is sufficiently path-dependent,
then landing on a schemer-like goal early enough could lock it in,
even if SGD would "prefer" some other sort of model overall. ↩︎ See Carlsmith (2020), footnote
4 ,
for more on how I'm understanding the meaning of probabilities like
this. I think that offering loose, subjective probabilities like
these often functions to sharpen debate, and to force an overall
synthesis of the relevant considerations. I want to be clear,
though, even on top of the many forms of vagueness the proposition
in question implicates, I'm just pulling a number from my gut. I
haven't built a quantitative model of the different considerations
(though I'd be interested to see efforts in this vein), and I think
that the main contribution of the report is the analysis itself,
rather than this attempt at a quantitative upshot. ↩︎ More powerful models are also more likely to be able to engage in
more sophisticated forms of goal-guarding (what I call
"introspective goal-guarding methods" below; see also " gradient
hacking "),
though these seem to me quite difficult in general. ↩︎ Though: to the extent such agents receive end-to-end training
rather than simply being built out of individually-trained
components, the discussion will apply to them as well. ↩︎ See, e.g., Ngo et al (2022) and this description of the "consensus threat model" from Deepmind's AGI
safety team (as of November 2022). ↩︎ Work by Evan Hubinger (along with his collaborators) is, in my
view, the most notable exception to this – and I'll be referencing
such work extensively in what follows. See, in particular,
Hubinger et al. (2021), and Hubinger (2022), among many other
discussions. Other public treatments include Christiano (2019, part
2) , Steinhardt
(2022) , Ngo et al (2022) , Cotra (2021) , Cotra
(2022) , Karnofsky (2022) , and Shah
(2022) .
But many of these are quite short, and/or lacking in in-depth
engagement with the arguments for and against expecting schemers of
the relevant kind. There are also more foundational treatments of
the "treacherous turn" (e.g., in Bostrom (2014), and Yudkowsky
(undated) ), of which
scheming is a more specific instance; and even more foundational
treatments of the "convergent instrumental values" that could give
rise to incentives towards deception, goal-guarding, and so on
(e.g., Omohundro
(2008) ;
and see also Soares (2023) for a related statement of an
Omohundro-like concern). And there are treatments of AI deception
more generally (for example, Park et al
(2023) ); and of "goal
misgeneralization"/inner alignment/mesa-optimizers (see, e.g., Langosco et al (2021) and Shah
et al (2022) ). But importantly,
neither deception nor goal misgeneralization amount, on their own,
to scheming/deceptive alignment. Finally, there are highly
speculative discussions about whether something like scheming might
occur in the context of the so-called "Universal prior" (see e.g. Christiano
(2016) )
given unbounded amounts of computation, but this is of extremely
unclear relevance to contemporary neural networks. ↩︎ See, e.g., confusions between "alignment faking" in general and
"scheming" (or: goal-guarding scheming) in particular; or between
goal misgeneralization in general and scheming as a specific upshot
of goal misgeneralization; or between training-gaming and " gradient
hacking "
as methods of avoiding goal-modification; or between the sorts of
incentives at stake in training-gaming for instrumental reasons vs.
out of terminal concern for some component of the reward process. ↩︎ My hope is that extra clarity in this respect will help ward off
various confusions I perceive as relatively common (though: the
relevant concepts are still imprecise in many ways). ↩︎ E.g., the rough content I try to cover in my shortened report on
power-seeking AI, here .
See also Ngo et al (2022) for
another overview. ↩︎ E.g., roughly the content covered by Cotra (2021) here . ↩︎ See e.g. Karnofsky (2022) for more on this sort of
assumption, and Cotra
(2022) for a more detailed description of the sort of model and training
process I'll typically have in mind. ↩︎ Which isn't to say we won't. But I don't want to bank on it. ↩︎ See section 2.2 of Carlsmith
(2022) for more on what I
mean, and section 3 for more on why we should expect this (most
importantly: I think this sort of goal-directedness is likely to be
very useful to performing complex tasks; but also, I think available
techniques might push us towards AIs of this kind, and I think that
in some cases it might arise as a byproduct of other forms of
cognitive sophistication). ↩︎ As I discuss in section 2.2.3
of the report, I
think exactly how we understand the sort of agency/goal-directedness
at stake may make a difference to how we evaluate various arguments
for schemers (here I distinguish, in particular, between what I call
"clean" and "messy" goal-directedness) – and I think there's a case
to be made that scheming requires an especially high standard of
strategic and coherent goal-directedness. And in general, I think
that despite much ink spilled on the topic, confusions about
goal-directedness remain one of my topic candidates for a place the
general AI alignment discourse may mislead. ↩︎ See e.g. Butlin et al (2023) for a recent overview focused on consciousness in particular. But I
am also, personally, interested in other bases of moral status, like
the right kind of autonomy/desire/preference. ↩︎ See, for example, Bostrom and Shulman
(2022) and Greenblatt
(2023) for more on this topic. ↩︎ If you're confused by a term or argument, I encourage you to seek
out its explanation in the main text before despairing. ↩︎ Exactly what counts as the "specified goal" in a given case isn't
always clear, but roughly, the idea is that pursuit of the specified
goal is rewarded across a very wide variety of counterfactual
scenarios in which the reward process is held constant. E.g., if
training rewards the model for getting gold coins across
counterfactuals, then "getting gold coins" in the specified goal.
More discussion in section 1.2.2. ↩︎ For reasons I explain in
section 1.2.3, I don't use
the distinction, emphasized by Hubinger (2022), between
"internally aligned" and "corrigibly aligned" models. ↩︎ And of course, a model's goal system can mix these motivations
together. I discuss the relevance of this possibility in section 1.3.5. ↩︎ Karnofsky (2022) calls this the "King Lear problem." ↩︎ In section 1.3.5, I also discuss models that mix these
different motivations together. The question I tend to ask about a
given "mixed model" is whether it's scary in the way that pure
schemers are scary. ↩︎ I don't have a precise technical definition here, but the rough
idea is: the temporal horizon of the consequences to which the
gradients the model receives are sensitive, for its behavior on a
given input. Much more detail in section 2.2.1.1. ↩︎ See, for example, in Krueger et al
(2020) , the way that "myopic"
Q-learning can give rise to "cross-episode" optimization in very
simple agents. More discussion in
section 2.2.1.2. I don't focus on analysis of
this type in the report, but it's crucial to identifying what the
"incentivized episode" for a given training process even is – and
hence, what having "beyond-episode goals" in my sense would mean.
You don't necessary know this from surface-level description of a
training process, and neglecting this ignorance is a recipe for
seriously misunderstanding the incentives applied to a model in
training. ↩︎ That is, the model develops a beyond-episode goal pursuit of
which correlates well enough with reward in training, even absent training-gaming, that it survives the training process. ↩︎ That is, the gradients reflect the benefits of scheming even in a
model that doesn't yet have a beyond-episode goal, and so actively
push the model towards scheming. ↩︎ Situational awareness is required for a beyond-episode goal to
motivate training-gaming, and thus for giving it such a goal to reap
the relevant benefits. ↩︎ In principle, situational awareness and beyond-episode goals
could develop at the same time, but I won't treat these scenarios
separately here. ↩︎ See section 2.1 of Carlsmith
(2022) for more on why we
should expect this sort of goal-directedness. ↩︎ And I think that arguments to the effect that "we need a
' pivotal act '; pivotal acts are
long-horizon and we can't do them ourselves; so we need to create a
long-horizon optimizer of precisely the type we're most scared of"
are weak in various ways. In particular, and even setting aside
issues with a "pivotal act" framing, I think these arguments neglect
the distinction between what we can supervise and what we can do
ourselves. See
section 2.2.4.3 for more discussion. ↩︎ This is an objection pointed out to me by Katja Grace. Note that
it creates complicated feedback loops, where scheming is a good
strategy for a given schemer-like goal only if it wouldn't be a
good strategy for the other schemer-like goals that this goal
would otherwise "float" into. Overall, though, absent some form of
coordination between these different goals, I think the basic
dynamic remains a problem for the goal-guarding story. See section 2.3.1.1.2 for
more. ↩︎ Here I'm roughly following a distinction in Hubinger 2022 ,
who groups arguments for scheming on the basis of the degree of
"path dependence" they assume that ML training possesses. However,
for reasons I explain in section 2.5, I don't want to lean on the notion of
"path dependence" here, as I think it lumps together a number of
conceptually distinct properties best treated separately. ↩︎ Note that a mis-generalized goal can be "max reward" in this
sense, if the training data never differentiates between it and a
specified goal. For example: if you're training a model to get gold
coins, but the only gold round things you ever show it are coins,
then the goal "get gold round things" will be max reward. ↩︎ As a loose analogy to help prompt intuition: imagine freezing
human technology at current levels, and letting evolutionary
selection run on humans for a vastly longer period of time. What
sorts of humans (or human-descended-creatures) do you expect to
dominate in the longer term? In particular: would you expect: humans who intrinsically value something like " inclusive
genetic
fitness " or
"my genes getting selected for by evolution" (this is a loose
analogy for some combination of "the specified goal" and "the
reward process), humans who value something else very closely correlated with
inclusive genetic fitness (e.g., "having as many kids as
possible"), but who aren't explicitly optimizing for inclusive
genetic fitness even instrumentally (this is a loose analogy for
mis-generalized non-training-gamers), or humans with long-term goals who are optimizing for inclusive
genetic fitness specifically as a method for gaining power for
their values in the longer-term (this is a loose analogy for
schemers). Here, the analog of the story above would ask something like: what
is the smallest modification to existing human values (or better:
the easiest modification for evolution in particular to make) that
land us in one of the buckets above, while also being compatible
with the amount of evolutionary selection pressure at stake? (Of
course, the analogy brings in tons of confounding variable (for
example, related to the fact that evolution selects over
genomes-that-build-brains-that-learn-values rather than values
themselves, the role of cultural accumulation and memetic selection
in human population dynamics, the lack of a clear analog of a future
chance for escape/takeover, and so on).) ↩︎ That is, intuitively, it feels to me like "tweaking a cleanly
separable within-episode goal to make it long-term" is quite a bit
easier, for SGD, than "redirecting a tangled kludge broadly focused
on within-episode things to make it (a) focused on something
beyond-episode instead, and (b) such that this beyond-episode focus
back-chains into getting-reward for instrumental reasons" –
especially if (b) requires building new cognitive machinery for
implementing the instrumental reasoning in question. Whereas
"redirecting an tangled kludge focused on within-episode things to
higher-reward within-episode things in the same broad vicinity
instead" seems to me intuitively easier. ↩︎ Thus, for example, if you're rewarding your model when it gets
gold-coins-on-the-episode, then to be a training saint, it needs to
value gold-coin-on-the-episode. To be a mis-generalized
non-training-gamer, it needs to value something pursuit of which
very closely correlates with getting gold-coins-on-the-episode, even
absent training-gaming. And to be a reward-on-the-episode seeker, it
needs to terminally value reward-on-the-episode. ↩︎ Thus, for example, the model can value paperclips over all time,
it can value staples over all time, it can value happiness over all
time, and so on. ↩︎ Thus, as an analogy: if you don't know whether Bob prefers
Mexican food, Chinese food, or Thai food, then it's less clear how
the comparative number of Mexican vs. Chinese vs. Thai restaurants
in Bob's area should bear on our prediction of which one he went to
(though it still doesn't seem entirely irrelevant, either – for
example, more restaurants means more variance in possible quality within that type of cuisine). E.g., it could be that there are ten
Chinese restaurants for every Mexican restaurant, but if Bob likes
Mexican food better in general, he might just choose Mexican. So if
we don't know which type of cuisine Bob prefers, it's tempting to
move closer to a uniform distribution over types of cuisine ,
rather than over individual restaurants. ↩︎ See, for example, the citations in Mingard
(2021) . ↩︎ Though note that, especially for the purposes of comparing the
probability of scheming to the probability of other forms of
misalignment , we need not assume this. For example, our specified
goal might be much simpler than "act in accordance with human
values." It might, for example, be something like "get gold coins on
the episode." ↩︎ I heard this sort of point from Paul Christiano. ↩︎ And especially: models that are playing a training game in which
such concepts play a central role. ↩︎ Since we're no longer appealing to the complexity of representing
a goal, and are instead appealing to complexity differences at stake
in repurposing pre-existing conceptual representations for use in a
model's motivational system, which seems like even more uncertain
territory. ↩︎ One intuition pump for me here runs as follows. Suppose that the
model has 2 50 concepts (roughly 1e15) in its world
model/"database" that could in principle be turned into goals. The
average number of bits required to code for each of 2 50 concepts can't be higher than 50 (since: you can just assign a
different 50-bit string to each concept). So if we assume that
model's encoding is reasonably efficient with respect to the
average, and that the simplest non-schemer max-reward goal is takes
a roughly average-simplicity "pointer," then if we allocate one
parameter per bit, pointing at the simplest non-schemer-like max
reward goal is only an extra 50 parameters at maximum – one
twenty-billionth of a trillion-parameter model's capacity. That
said, I expect working out the details of this sort of argument to
get tricky, and I don't try to do so here (though I'd be interested
to see other work attempting to do so). ↩︎ Thus, as a toy example, if "maximize hydrogen" happens to be the
simplest possible long-term goal once you've got a fully detailed
world model, these assumptions might imply a high likelihood that
SGD will select schemers who want to maximize hydrogen, even if
training was all about gold coins, and never made hydrogen
salient/relevant as a point of focus at all (even as a proxy). ↩︎ E.g., plausibly "hydrogen" doesn't read as a simple concept for
humans, but concepts like "threat" do, because the latter was much
more relevant in our evolutionary environment. ↩︎ Though of course, insofar as there are still simpler schemer-like goal targets that were salient/relevant during
training, schemer-like goals might still win out overall. ↩︎ This category might also include reasoning whether to reveal its
schemer-like goals in the context of various "honest tests" humans
might offer – e.g., "here is a flexible chunk of computing resources
to do what you want with." ↩︎ For example, inserting backdoors into the code it writes,
actively undermining human alignment research, sandbagging, and so
on. ↩︎ Compare with: deciding that this is really-truly a good time to
steal, or to break the law, or to try to start a coup, despite the
fact that you live your life in an intensively monitored
surveillance state where the police are constantly trying to trick
you into such behavior, and where the police have a large amount of
control over the information you're exposed to. And note that if
schemers decide to be very cautious, and to just behave exactly as
humans want until an extremely obvious escape/take-over opportunity
appears, they may make very substantive contributions to our
alignment, security, and control efforts in the meantime -- so
substantive, indeed, that the opportunity they're waiting for may
never come. ↩︎ A general factor in the backdrop, here, is the sense in which
successful deception generally implies cognitive costs that more
straightforward and honest policies do not, especially in the
presence of active efforts to detect deception of the relevant form.
In particular: telling a deceptive story about the world requires
filling in details, and maintaining forms of consistency, that one
can normally offload onto the world itself – e.g., an innocent
person can just think back to what they were actually doing the
night of the murder and recount it, without having to make anything
up or to worry about getting caught in any inconsistencies, whereas
the murderer cannot. See e.g. discussion from Shulman and Patel here . ↩︎ I heard this sort of argument from Paul Christiano. ↩︎ It's not clear, for example, how it applies to models with more
recurrent processing, or to models which can perform more of the
relevant instrumental reasoning in parallel with other serial
processing that helps with optimizing-for-reward-on-the-episode, or
to model's with a form of "memory" that allows them to avoid having
to re-decide to engage in training-gaming on every forward pass. ↩︎ Thanks to Paul Christiano for discussion here. ↩︎ I think this sense of conjunctiveness has a few different
components: Part of it is about whether the model really has relevantly
long-term and ambitious goals despite the way it was shaped in
training. Part of it is about whether there is a good enough story about
why getting reward on the episode is a good instrumental
strategy for pursuing those goals (e.g., doubts about the
goal-guarding hypothesis, the model's prospects for empowerment
later, etc). Part of it is that a schemer-like diagnosis also brings in
additional conjuncts  – for example, that the model is
situationally aware and coherently goal-directed. (When I really
try to bring to mind that this model knows what is going on and is coherently pursuing some goal/set of goals in the sort
of way that gives rise to strategic instrumental reasoning, then
the possibility that it's at least partly a schemer seems more
plausible.) ↩︎