Explore the hidden treasures of the forums With this tool you can zoom in on your favorite topics from EA Forum, LessWrong, and Alignment Forum. Or you can just wander around and see what you find. You start by seeing the whole forum split into two main topics. Choose the one that you like more, and that topic will be split again into two subtopics. Choose a subtopic, and again, you will see it split into two subsubtopics (and so on). It's like climbing a tree, where you start at the trunk and then choose which branches to go into as you go higher. Choose a forum to climb: EA Forum LessWrong Alignment Forum Some tips: it's easier to choose a branch by looking at tags rather than posts on mobile, horizontal view is more practical Features Each topic has a unique and unchanging URL. So if you find a place you like, just bookmark it! The posts inside will be updated, but the theme stays the same. The bar at the right of each post is the reading time indicator. Full bar means 30 min, half bar means 15 min, and so on. At the top right, you can choose how to rank the posts: hot - new and upvoted - the default forum ranking top - most upvotes alive - has recent comments meritocratic - votes from high karma users are exaggerated regular - default scoring democratic - posts are scored as if everyone has the same voting power My hopes The amount of content is overwhelming. My problem is not that there's nothing good to read, but that there is so much to plow through to find what's best for me. Also, it's sad to see great posts receive so little attention, the moment after they are pushed off the frontpage. But they are still valuable, and for each forgotten post, there is someone who should read it. So I want to make the right topics find their way to the right people. Let's make the forums evergreen ! Tag similarity For each tag, you can also see what tags are most related to it: Explore EA Forum tags Explore LessWrong tags Explore Alignment Forum tags Tip: you can go directly to some tag, by finding it's URL on the forum, and modifying this site's URL. For example, to go to "Consciousness research", you find https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/topics/consciousness-research and go to https://filyp.github.io/tree-of-tags/ea/consciousness-research EA Forum: LessWrong: Alignment Forum: How does it work? Here I explain all the details. Cross-posted to EA Forum .