This is a linkpost for a new research paper of ours, introducing a simple but powerful technique for jailbreaking, Best-of-N Jailbreaking, which works across modalities (text, audio, vision) and shows power-law scaling in the amount of test-time compute used for the attack. Abstract We introduce Best-of-N (BoN) Jailbreaking, a simple black-box algorithm that jailbreaks frontier AI systems across modalities. BoN Jailbreaking works by repeatedly sampling variations of a prompt with a combination of augmentations - such as random shuffling or capitalization for textual prompts - until a harmful response is elicited. We find that BoN Jailbreaking achieves high attack success rates (ASRs) on closed-source language models, such as 89% on GPT-4o and 78% on Claude 3.5 Sonnet when sampling 10,000 augmented prompts. Further, it is similarly effective at circumventing state-of-the-art open-source defenses like circuit breakers. BoN also seamlessly extends to other modalities: it jailbreaks vision language models (VLMs) such as GPT-4o and audio language models (ALMs) like Gemini 1.5 Pro, using modality-specific augmentations. BoN reliably improves when we sample more augmented prompts. Across all modalities, ASR, as a function of the number of samples (N), empirically follows power-law-like behavior for many orders of magnitude. BoN Jailbreaking can also be composed with other black-box algorithms for even more effective attacks - combining BoN with an optimized prefix attack achieves up to a 35% increase in ASR. Overall, our work indicates that, despite their capability, language models are sensitive to seemingly innocuous changes to inputs, which attackers can exploit across modalities. Tweet Thread We include an expanded version of our tweet thread with more results here. New research collaboration: “Best-of-N Jailbreaking”. We found a simple, general-purpose method that jailbreaks (bypasses their safety features of) frontier AI models, and that works across text, vision, and audio. Best-of-N works by repeatedly making small changes to prompts, like random capitalization and character shuffling, until it successfully jailbreaks a model. In testing, it worked on Claude 3 Opus 92% of the time, and even worked on models with “circuit breaking” defenses. Best-of-N isn't limited to text. We jailbroke vision language models by repeatedly generating images with different backgrounds and overlaid text in different fonts. For audio, we adjusted pitch, speed, and background noise. Some examples are here: https://jplhughes.github.io/bon-jailbreaking/#examples Attack success rates scale predictably with sample size, following a power law. More samples lead to higher success rates; Best-of-N can harness more compute for tougher jailbreaks. This predictable scaling allows accurate forecasting of ASR when using more samples. Best-of-N can be composed with other jailbreak techniques for even more effective attacks with improved sample efficiency. Combined with many-shot jailbreaking on text inputs, Best-of-N achieves the same ASR 28x faster for Claude 3.5 Sonnet. Before sharing these results publicly, we disclosed the vulnerability to other frontier AI labs via the Frontier Model Forum (@fmf_org). Responsible disclosure of jailbreaks is essential, especially as AI models become more capable. We’re open-sourcing our code so that others can build on our work. We hope it assists in benchmarking misuse risk, and designing defenses to safeguard against strong adaptive attacks. Paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.03556 GitHub: https://github.com/jplhughes/bon-jailbreaking Website: https://jplhughes.github.io/bon-jailbreaking