Related to: Löb's Theorem for implicit reasoning in natural language: Löbian party invitations tl;dr: Löb's Theorem is much easier to grok if you separate the parts of the proof that use the assumption □ p → p from the parts that don't.  The parts that don't use □ p → p can be extracted as a stand-alone result, which I hereby dub "Löb's Lemma". Here's how it works. Key properties of ⊢ and □ Here is some standard notation.  In short, ⊢ is our symbol for talking about what PA can prove, and □ is shorthand for PA's symbols for talking about what (a copy of) PA can prove. " ⊢ 1+1=2" means "Peano Arithmetic (PA) can prove that 1+1=2".  No parentheses are needed; the " ⊢ " applies to the whole line that follows it.  Also, ⊢ does not stand for an expression in PA; it's a symbol we use to talk about what PA can prove. " □ ( 1+1=2 ) " basically means the same thing.  More precisely, it stands for a numerical expression within PA that can be translated as saying " ⊢ 1+1=2".  This translation is possible because of something called a Gödel numbering which allows PA to talk about a (numerically encoded version of) itself. " □ X " is short for " □ ( X ) " in cases where " X " is just a single character of text. " X ⊢ Y " means "PA, along with X as an additional axiom/assumption, can prove Y". In this post we don't have any analogous notation for □ . The proofs here will use the following standard properties of ⊢ and □ ( source: Wikipedia ), which respectively stand for provability and provability encoded within arithmetic. (necessitation) From ⊢ A , conclude ⊢ □ A .  Informally, this says that if A can be proven, then it can be proven that it can be proven (by just writing out and checking the proof within arithmetic).  Note that from X ⊢ A we cannot conclude X ⊢ □ A , because □ still means "PA can prove", and not "PA+X can prove". (internal necessitation) ⊢ □ A → □ □ A . If A is provable, then it is provable that it is provable (basically the same as the previous point). (box distributivity) ⊢ □ ( A → B ) → ( □ A → □ B ) . This rule allows one to apply modus ponens inside the provability operator. If it is provable that A implies B, and A is provable, then B is provable. ( deduction theorem ) From A ⊢ B , conclude ⊢ A → B : if assuming A is enough to prove B , then it's possible to prove under no assumptions that A → B . Point 4 is helpful and pretty intuitive, but for whatever reason isn't used in the main Wikipedia article on Löb's Theorem. Löb's Lemma Claim : Assume Ψ and p are any statements satisfying ⊢ Ψ ↔ □ Ψ → p .  Then ⊢ □ Ψ ↔ □ p . Intuition: By assumption, the sentence Ψ is equivalent to saying "If this sentence is provable, then p ".  Intuitively, Ψ has very little content, except for the p part at the end, so it makes sense that □ Ψ boils down to nothing more than □ p in terms of logical equivalence. Reminder: this does not use the assumption □ p → p from Löb's Theorem at all. Proof : Let's do the forward implication first: □ Ψ ⊢ □ □ Ψ by internal necessitation ( □ Ψ → □ □ Ψ ). □ Ψ ⊢ □ ( □ Ψ → p ) using box distributivity on the assumption, with A = Ψ and B = □ Ψ → p . □ Ψ ⊢ □ p from 1 and 2 by box distributivity. ⊢ □ Ψ → □ p from 3 by the deduction theorem . Now for the backwards implication, which isn't needed for Löb's Theorem, but is handy anyway: ⊢ p → ( □ Ψ → p ) is a tautology. ⊢ □ p → □ ( □ Ψ → p ) by box distributivity on 1. ⊢ □ Ψ ↔ □ ( □ Ψ → p ) by box distributivity on the assumption. ⊢ □ p → □ Ψ by 2 and 3. I like this result because both directions of the proof are fairly short, it doesn't use the assumption □ p → p at all, and the conclusion itself is also fairly intuitive.  The statement Ψ just turns out to have no content except for p itself, from the perspective of writing proofs. Löb's Theorem, now in just 6 lines If you can remember Löb's Lemma, you can write a very straightforward proof of Löb's Theorem in just 6 lines: Claim: If p is any sentence such that ⊢ □ p → p , then ⊢ p Proof: Let Ψ be any sentence satisfying ⊢ Ψ ↔ ( □ Ψ → p ) , which exists by the existence of modal fixed points (or by the Diagonal Lemma). ⊢ □ Ψ → □ p by Löb's Lemma. ⊢ □ p → p by assumption. ⊢ □ Ψ → p by 1 and 2 combined. ⊢ Ψ by 3 and the defining property of Ψ ⊢ □ Ψ by necessitation. ⊢ p by 3 and 5. «mic drop»