I kept seeing all kinds of crazy reports about people's experiences with GPT-3, so I figured that I'd start collecting them. first gwern's crazy collection of all kinds of prompts, with GPT-3 generating poetry, summarizing stories, rewriting things in different styles, and much much more. ( previous discussion ) Automatic code generation from natural language descriptions . "Give me a page with a table showing the GDP of different nations, and a red button." Building a functioning React app by just describing it to GPT-3. Taking a brief technical tweet about GPT-3 and expanding it to an essay which the author of the original tweet mostly endorses. Acting as a more intense therapist than ELIZA ever was. [ 1 , 2 ] On the other hand, you can trick GPT-3 into saying nonsense . On the other hand, you can just prompt it to point out the nonsense . Redditor shares  an "AI Dungeon" game played with the new GPT-3 -based "Dragon Model", involving a cohesive story generated in response to their actions, with only a little manual editing. The official Dragon Model announcement. I was a little skeptical about some of these GPT-3 results until I tried the Dragon Model myself, and had it generate cohesive space opera with almost no editing. Another example of automatically generated code, this time giving GPT-3 a bit of React code defining a component called "ThreeButtonComponent" or "HeaderComponent", and letting it write the rest. From a brief description of a medical issue, GPT-3 correctly generates an explanation indicating that it's a case of asthma, mentions a drug that's used to treat asthma, the type of receptor the drug works on, and which multiple-choice quiz question this indicates. GPT-3 tries to get a software job, and comes close to passing a phone screen . Translating natural language descriptions into shell commands , and vice versa . Given a prompt with a few lines of dialogue, GPT-3 continues the story , incorporating details such as having a character make 1800s references after it was briefly mentioned that she's a nineteenth-century noblewoman. Turning natural language into lawyerese . Using GPT-3 to help you with gratitude journaling . Source is an anonymous image board poster so could be fake, but: if you give an AI Dungeon character fake wolf ears and then ask her to explain formal logic to you, she may use the ears in her example . Even after seeing all the other results, I honestly have difficulties believing that this one is real. Of course, even GPT-3 fumbles sometimes .