Why did I create both a post and a wiki article? Posts are best for making sure people see the initial version of the post, whilst Wiki articles are best for long-term maintenance. Posting an article that links to a Wiki page provides the best of both worlds. For the most up-to-date version, see the Wiki page . Articles : There should be more AI safety organisations Why does the AI Safety Community need help founding projects? AI Assurance Tech Report AI Safety as a YC Startup Alignment can be the ‘clean energy’ of AI AI Tools for Existential Security Incubation Programs: Def/acc at Entrepreneur First - this is a new program, which focuses on "defensive" tech, which will produce a wide variety of startups, some of which may help with reducing x-risk, but others may include AI applications like autonomous weapons or diagnostic medical software, which, while they generally won't increase x-risk, may not reduce it either. Catalyze - AI Safety Incubation Seldon Accelerator : “We take on AGI risk with optimism” AE Studio has expressed interest in helping seed neglected approaches, incl. ideas that take the form of business ideas AIS Friendly General Program: Founding to Give : General EA incubator Entrepreneur First - They run def/acc, so this could be a decent alternative Halycon Futures : “We’re an entrepreneurial nonprofit and VC fund dedicated to making AI safe, secure and good for humanity.” They do new project incubation, grants, investments, ect. Communities : Entrepreneurship Channel EA Anyway AI Safety Founders: Website , Discord , LinkedIn VC: AI Safety Seed Funding Network Lionheart Ventures - “We invest in the wise development of transformative technologies.” Juniper Ventures - Invests in companies “working to make AI safe, secure and beneficial for humanity”. Published the AI Assurance Tech Report Polaris Ventures - “We support projects and people aiming to build a future guided by wisdom and compassion for all” Mythos Ventures - “an early-stage venture capital firm investing in prosocial technologies for the transformative AI era.” Metaplanet - “We support novel and evidence-based innovation that could produce an outsized return for the benefit of humankind.” Anthology Fund - Backed by Anthropic. One of the five key areas is “trust and safety tooling” Menlo Ventures - Lead the GoodFire round ( article ) Safe AI Fund Organisational Support: Ashgro - fiscal sponsorship Rethink Priorities Special Projects - provides fiscal sponsorship or incubation Other: Hackathon for AI Safety Startups - Ran once by Apart Research, may run again Constellation Residency - Year-long position Nonlinear - Free coaching for people who are running an AI safety startup or who are considering starting one Dustbin - Things that previously existed Longtermist Entrepreneurship Project - Retrospective