AI Safety Camp connects you with an experienced research lead to collaborate on a research project – helping you try your fit for a potential career in AI Safety research. The applications for AI Safety Camp’s Virtual Edition in 2023 are now open ! AI Safety Camp Virtual 8 will be a 3.5-month long online research program from 4 March to 18 June 2023, where participants form teams to work on pre-selected projects. We value people with diverse backgrounds and skillsets, such as cybersecurity or cognitive science. Not all projects require participants to have prior experience in AI Safety, mathematics or machine learning. You will be able to read in detail about the research topics & each project’s skill requirements for our upcoming edition by following the Project Proposal links below. Projects Projects you can apply to… Conceptualise AGI dynamics Uncertainty -> Soft Optimization with Jeremy Gillen Inquire into Uncontrollable Dynamics of AGI with Remmelt Ellen Discussing and Crystallising a Research Agenda Based on Positive Attractors and Inherently Interpretable Architectures with Robert Kralisch Investigate transformer models Cyborgism with Nicholas Kees Dupuis Understanding Search in Transformers with Michael Ivanitskiy Interdisciplinary Investigation of DebateGPT with Paul Bricman Finetune language transformers Does Introspective Truthfulness Generalize in LMs? with Jacob Pfau Inducing Human-Like Biases in Moral Reasoning LMs with Bogdan-Ionut Cirstea Create annotation tools Behavioral Annotation Framework for the Contextualized and Personalized Fine-Tuning of Foundation Models with Eleanor “Nell” Watson Review and analyse literature How Should Machines Learn from Default Options? with En Qi Teo Literature Review of the Neurological Basis of Human Values and Preferences with Linda Linsefors Machine learning for Scientific Discovery: the Present and Future of Science-Producing AI Models with Eleni Angelou Propose public policy/communication Policy Proposals for High-Risk AI Regulation with Koen Holtman Developing Specific Failure Stories about Uncontrollable AI with Karl von Wendt Apply to AISC Virtual 2023 Apply if you… want to try out & consider ways you could help ensure that future AI performs safely and in line with what people value upon reflection; are ready to dig into our research leads’ research topics and are able to write down a few clear arguments for why you’d research one in particular & how you might start; previously studied a topic or practiced skills unique to your perspective/background that can bolster your new research team’s progress; can block off hours to focus on research from March to June 2023 on normal workdays and the weekends (at least 10 hours per week). Application timeline 5 Jan 2023 00:01 UTC Project proposals are posted on our website. Application form opens . Reviews start right away . 19 Jan 23:59 AoE Deadline to apply to teams closes. Late submissions might not get a response. 1 March 23:59 AoE Last applicant admitted or declined (most will be informed of our decision earlier). First virtual edition – a spontaneous collage Timeline January 5 :  Accepted proposals are posted on the AISC website. Application to join teams open . January 19 :  Application to join teams closes. Until February end :  Organisers pre-filter applications. RLs interview potential members and pick their team. March 4-5 :  Opening weekend. From here, teams meet weekly, and plan in their own work hours. June 17-18 : Closing weekend. All teams present their results. ​ Team structure Every team will have: one Research Lead one Team Coordinator other team members All team members are expected to work at least 10 hours per week on the project, which includes joining weekly team meetings, and communicating regularly (between meetings) with other team members about their work. As of yet, we cannot commit to offering stipends compensation for team members, because a confirmed grant fell through. Another grantmaker is in the midst of evaluating a replacement grant for AI Safety Camp. If confirmed, team members can opt in to receive a minimum of $500 gross per month (up to $2000 for full-time work). Research Lead (RL) The RL is the person behind the research proposal. If a group forms around their topics, the RL will guide the research project, and keep track of relevant milestones. When things inevitably don’t go as planned (this is research after all) the RL is in charge of setting the new course. The RL is part of the research team and will be contributing to research the same as everyone else on the team. Team Coordinator (TC) The TC is the ops person of the team. They are in charge of making sure meetings are scheduled, checks in with individuals on their task progress, etc. TC and RL can be the same person. The role of the TC is important but not expected to take too much time (except for project management-heavy teams). Most of the time, the TC will act like a regular team member contributing to the research, same as everyone else on the team. Other team members Other team members will work on the project under the leadership of the RL and the TC. Team members will be selected based on relevant skills, understandings and commitments to contribute to the research project. Questions? You can contact us at contact@aisafety.camp