This is Section 5 of my report “ Scheming AIs: Will AIs fake alignment during training in order to get power? ”. There’s also a summary of the full report here (audio here ). The summary covers most of the main points and technical terms, and I’m hoping that it will provide much of the context necessary to understand individual sections of the report on their own. Audio version of this section here , or search for "Joe Carlsmith Audio" on your podcast app. Summing up I've now reviewed the main arguments I've encountered for expecting SGD
to select a schemer. What should we make of these arguments overall? We've reviewed a wide variety of interrelated considerations, and it can
be difficult to hold them all in mind at once. On the whole, though, I
think a fairly large portion of the overall case for expecting schemers
comes down to some version of the "counting argument." In particular, I
think the counting argument is also importantly underneath many of the
other, more specific arguments I've considered. Thus: In the context of the "training-game-independent proxy goal"
argument : the basic worry is that at some point (whether before
situational awareness, or afterwards), SGD will land naturally on a
(suitably ambitious) beyond-episode goal that incentivizes scheming.
And one of the key reasons for expecting this is just: that
(especially if you're actively training for fairly long-term,
ambitious goals), it seems like a very wide variety of goals that
fall out of training could have this property. (For example: to the
extent one expects beyond-episode goals because "goals don't come
with calendar-time restrictions by default," one is effectively
appealing to a "counting argument" to the effect that the set of
beyond-episode goals is much larger than the set of within-episode
goals.) In the context of the "nearest max-reward goal" argument : the
basic worry is that because schemer-like goals are quite common in
goal-space, some such goal will be quite "nearby" whatever
not-yet-max-reward goal the model has at the point it gains
situational awareness, and thus, that modifying the model into a
schemer will be the easiest way for SGD to point the model's
optimization in the highest-reward direction. In the context of the "simplicity argument" : the reason one
expects schemers to be able to have simpler goals than non-schemers
is that they have so many possible goals (or: pointers-to-goals) to
choose from. (Though: I personally find this argument quite a bit
less persuasive than the counting argument itself, partly because
the simplicity benefits at stake seem to me quite small.) That is, in all of these cases, schemers are being privileged as a
hypothesis because a very wide variety of goals could in principle lead
to scheming, thereby making it easier to (a) land on one of them
naturally, (b) land "nearby" one of them, or (c) find one of them that
is "simpler" than non-schemer goals that need to come from a more
restricted space. And in this sense, as I noted in the
section 4.2, the case for schemers mirrors one of
the most basic arguments for expecting misalignment more
generally – e.g., that alignment is a very narrow target to hit in
goal-space. Except, here, we are specifically incorporating the
selection we know we are going to do on the goals in question: namely,
they need to be such as to cause models pursuing them to get high
reward. And the most basic worry is just that: this isn't enough. Still,
despite your best efforts in training, and almost regardless of your
reward signal, almost all the models you might've selected will be
getting high reward for instrumental reasons – and specifically, in
order to get power. I think this basic argument, in its various guises, is a serious source
of concern. If we grant that advanced models will be relevantly
goal-directed and situationally-aware, that a wide variety of goals
would indeed lead to scheming, and that schemers would perform
close-to-optimally in training, then on what grounds, exactly, would we
assume that training has produced a non-schemer instead? Perhaps, per
the "haziness" of my "hazy counting argument," we don't specifically
allocate our credence over models in proportion to some attempt to
"count" the possible goals in question. But even a hazy sense that "lots
of goals" lead to scheming is, in my book, cause for alarm, here. We
don't know enough about ML training, at this stage, to be confident that
we've avoided the relevant parts of goal-space. Rather, if our knowledge
does not improve, we will be faced, centrally, with some goal-directed
mind that understands what's going on and the process we are using to
shape it, and which is getting high reward because it wants something .
"Why, exactly, does the thing it wants lead it to get high reward?" we
will have to ask. And the most basic answer will be: "we don't know."
That's not an acceptable answer. It's not acceptable with respect to the
possibility of misalignment in general. And it's especially
unacceptable, in my view, if a very wide variety of especially-scary
misaligned goals would give rise to this behavior as part of a strategy
for seeking power. That said, I do think there are a few causes for comfort here. We can
break these into roughly two categories. The first focuses on questions about whether scheming is, in fact, such
a convergently rational instrumental strategy for such a wide variety of
beyond-episode goals. In particular: The "classic goal-guarding story" rests on the claim that scheming
is a good way for the model to propagate goals-it-wants-promoted
forward in time, in a manner that yields sufficiently large amounts
of future power for those goals as to justify any costs the model is
incurring by training-gaming rather than just going for its goals
directly. But there are a variety of ways in which this could be
false. For example: Training-gaming might not be enough to prevent the goals in
question from continuing to change to a degree that makes the
strategy no longer worth it. For example, training might cause
these goals to "float around," or it might push towards some
especially optimal type of
goal/goal-like-focus-of-a-messy-kludge-of-heuristics. The model's prospects for getting enough power for those goals,
on the right timescales, might not be good enough to outweigh
the benefits of the model just going for its goals directly
during training (and getting modified as a result), especially
if the model's beyond-episode goals are not especially
"ambitious," and/or it has other competing priorities. This makes the "classic goal-guarding story" seem at least somewhat
conjunctive in its explanation for why training-gaming is the right
strategy for so many beyond-episode goals. And certain "non-classic"
stories seem like they shrink the possible set of goals to which
they apply dramatically. For example, if we posit that the model has
values that put terminal weight on something like "my survival" (for
some notion of personal identity quite tolerant of values-change),
or on AI takeover even if the AIs-that-take-over have very different
preferences from the model itself, we are now imposing much more
specific requirements on the schemer-like goals in question. That said: not all non-classic stories have this property. For
example, stories that center on coordination amongst AIs with
very different values, and on the possibility that AIs will all
have very similar values by default, still work across a wide
variety of goals. And perhaps there are reasons to expect
terminal goals like "survival" to be especially common (e.g.,
because common instrumental values are especially liable to get
turned into terminal values – though: we can use adversarial
training to try to prevent this). [1] The second source of comfort focuses on forms of selection pressure that
a high level counting argument, based solely on the assumption that the
selected model gets "high reward," doesn't cover. In particular: Prior to situational awareness, training will naturally penalize beyond-episode goals (and perhaps especially: ambitious
beyond-episode goals) whenever they lead to a sacrifice of
reward-on-the-episode. Alos: prior to situational awareness, we can specifically try to
use adversarial training to penalize beyond-episode goals (and
ambitious goals) further, and to otherwise shape the model's goals
to be "nearer" to non-schemer goals than to schemer-like goals. Of course, many non-schemer goals are themselves misaligned. But
if we decided that scheming is sufficiently scary relative to
other forms of misalignment (e.g.,
reward-on-the-episode-seeking), the ability to specifically
ensure that we haven't created a schemer may be worthwhile to
develop. [2] To the extent that schemers need to engage in extra forms of
instrumental reasoning (e.g., deciding to scheme for instrumental
reasons, checking for escape/defection opportunities), this may come
at an additional cost to their performance. And to the extent they
engage in early undermining (the scariest form of scheming, in my
view), their performance seems likely, to me, to take a more
substantive hit (sandbagging on checkable tasks, for example,
involves a performance hit by definition). What's more, we may be able to actively design our oversight and
training processes so as to both (a) increase the costs of such
reasoning (e.g., by making genuine escape opportunities harder
to distinguish from traps), and (b) to penalize extra reasoning
of this form harder (by putting models under substantial time
pressure, making instrumental reasoning into a scarce resource,
forcing them to rely on english-language scratch-pads and other
forms of human-legible reasoning as their central mode of
planning, etc –  though these interventions may come with
competitiveness costs). Schemer performance could also suffer from their lack of some analog
of "intrinsic passion" for the task at hand – e.g., because the
heuristics, patterns of attention, tastes, and so on involved in
"intrinsic passion" blur the line between capabilities and values.
However, this consideration seems considerably more speculative. The possibility that there are additional selection pressures that
disfavor schemers, here (and in particular: the possibility that SGD
intrinsically disfavors schemers due to their needing to perform extra
reasoning), seems to me especially important given the centrality of
"counting arguments" to the various arguments in favor of expecting
scheming. In particular: I think that a key way that "counting
arguments" in general tend to go wrong is by neglecting the power that
active selection can have in overcoming the "prior" set by the count in
question. Thus, to borrow an epistemic example/analogy from Xu
(2021) , your "prior" that my name
is "Joseph Carlsmith" should be quite low, because there is a very
strong "counting argument" against this hypothesis: namely, that most
names (even for men in my demographic etc) are not "Joseph Carlsmith."
But when I tell you that my name is "Joseph Carlsmith," this is
actually very strong
evidence – enough to overcome the
prior and leave you confident in the hypothesis in question. And
something similar holds for various forms of selection in building
functional artifacts. The reason we can overcome the prior of "most
arrangements of car parts don't form a working car," or "most parameter
settings in this neural network don't implement a working chatbot," is
that the selection power at stake in human engineering, and in SGD, is that strong . So if SGD's selection power is actively working against
schemers, this might quickly overcome a "counting argument" in their
favor. For example, as I discussed in
section 4.2: if there are 2^100 schemer-like
goals for every non-schemer goal, this might make it seem very difficult
to hit a non-schemer goal in the relevant space. But actually, 100 bits
of a selection pressure can be cheap for SGD (consider, for example, 100
extra gradient updates, each worth at least a halving of the remaining
possible goals, in the context of a training run that involves many
million). [3] For this reason, the question of whether SGD "cares" a lot about the
extra reasoning schemers have to do (and/or, whether we can "make it
care more") seems to me fairly key here. That is, if just grinding
harder on SGD's intrinsic preferences (e.g., for high reward behavior)
is itself a force selecting against schemers, then counting arguments or
no, I think that anti-schemer efforts have a very powerful tool in their
favor. In this respect, I feel intuitively more optimistic about
anti-schemer efforts in "low slack" training environments that put a lot
of pressure on models to perform optimally – and this is a parameter
that we may be able to control. And I feel more worried about schemers
in a "path dependent" regime in which SGD might light on a schemer goal
early in training, and then get stuck there despite the fact that it
would have "preferred" a non-schemer overall. Another question that seems important to me is whether SGD's
incrementalism blocks "training-game-dependent" stories about the
origins of schemer-like goals – e.g., the "nearest max-reward goal"
argument. If so, I think, this would be a meaningfully additional source
of comfort. In particular: to me it seems much easier to avoid naturally giving a model a (suitably ambitious) beyond-episode goal
than it is to make sure that by the time the model is situationally
aware, its goal is sufficiently close to max-reward that there isn't a
schemer-like goal "nearby" along some dimension. In particular: the
image of SGD specifically "searching out" the nearest max reward goal,
in a space where a wide array of schemer-like goals are accessible to
the search, seems to me quite worrying (and also: more likely to result
in beyond-episode goals with whatever properties are specifically
necessary to incentivize scheming – e.g., highly ambitious goals, goals
with unbounded time horizons, and so on). Finally, I want to re-emphasize some ongoing uncertainty about whether
scheming requires an unusually high standard of goal-directedness. I've
been trying, here, to separate debates about goal-directedness per se
from debates about which sorts of goal-directed models to expect SGD to
select. But insofar as even highly capable AIs may not require the sort
of coherent, strategic goal-directedness the alignment discourse often
assumes, I think this may be especially relevant to the probability that
such AIs will be well understood as "schemers," since the form of
goal-directedness at stake in scheming seems especially coherent,
strategic, and
" consequentialist ." Stepping back and trying to look at these considerations as a whole, I
feel pulled in two different directions. On the one hand, at least conditional on scheming being a
convergently-good instrumental strategy, schemer-like goals feel
scarily common in goal-space, and I feel pretty worried that
training will run into them for one reason or another. On the other hand, ascribing a model's good performance in training
to scheming continues to feel, at a gut level, like a fairly
specific and conjunctive story to me. That is, scheming feels robust and common at the level of "goal space,"
and yet specific and fairly brittle at the level of "yes that's what's
going on with this real-world model, it's getting reward because (or:
substantially because) it wants to get power later and getting reward
now helps with that." I think this sense of conjunctiveness has a few
different components: Part of it is about whether the model really has relevantly
long-term and ambitious goals despite the way it was shaped in
training. Part of it is about whether there is a good enough story about why
getting reward on the episode is a good instrumental strategy for
pursuing those goals (e.g., doubts about the goal-guarding
hypothesis, the model's prospects for empowerment later, etc). Part of it is that a schemer-like diagnosis also brings in
additional conjuncts that I haven't been focusing on  – for example,
that the model is situationally aware and coherently
goal-directed. [4] (When I really try to bring to mind that this
model knows what is going on and is coherently pursuing some goal/set of goals in the sort of way that gives rise to strategic
instrumental reasoning, then the possibility that it's at least
partly a schemer seems more plausible.) Can we put a rough, subjective number on the overall likelihood of
schemers? In my opinion, and despite their drawbacks, numbers like this
often function to sharpen the debate a bit, so I'll give it a shot here.
Let's say: if you train a coherently goal-directed, situationally
aware, somewhat-better-than-human-level model using baseline forms of
self-supervised pre-training + RLHF on diverse, long-horizon, real-world
tasks, my subjective probability is ~25% that this model will be
performing well in training in substantial part as part of an
instrumental strategy for seeking power for itself and/or other AIs
later. I want to be clear, though, that even on top of the many forms of
vagueness the claim above implicates, I'm just pulling a number from my
gut. I haven't built a quantitative model of the relevant considerations
(though I'd be interested to see efforts in this vein), and the main
point of the report is the analysis itself, not this attempt to
synthesize the analysis into a quantitative upshot. I also think it may be possible to reduce the risk here in fairly simple
ways: for example, via training on shorter-horizon tasks, or via various
forms of adversarial training prior to situational awareness. And I
think the probability that the model is both scheming and engaging in
actively nefarious actions like sandbagging and early undermining is
lower, because these actions come at more significant costs in terms of
cognition and reward. I also think that the risk increases with more powerful models, who
may be better positioned to escape/take-over in the future and to
coordinate/cooperate with other AIs in doing so, and who are more likely
to be able to engage in more sophisticated forms of goal-guarding like
"introspective goal-guarding methods" (though these seem to me
intuitively quite challenging even for quite advanced AIs). Finally, I want to re-emphasize that non-schemers can engage in
schemer-like behavior, too. Reward-on-the-episode seekers can fake their
alignment (or even: engage in escape/take-over) in an effort to get
reward-on-the-episode; non-training-gamers can still end up with
power-seeking goals that incentivize various forms of deception; and the
eventual AIs that matter most might differ in important ways from the
paradigm sort of AI I've been focused on here (for example, they might
be more like " language model
agents " than
single models, or they might be created via methods that differ even
more substantially from sort of baseline ML methods I've focused on),
while still engaging in power-motivated alignment-faking. [5] Scheming, in my view, is a paradigm instance of this sort of scariness,
and one that seems, to me, especially pressing to understand. But it's
far from the only source of concern. Though again: it needs to be a notion of "survival" tolerant
of values-change. ↩︎ See section 6.8 for a bit more on this. ↩︎ Thanks to Paul Christiano for discussion here. ↩︎ It also feels a bit difficult to track all of the other, subtler
conjuncts that can build up in the backdrop of the schemer
hypothesis. ↩︎ Though as noted above, if the relevant language model agents are
trained end to end (as opposed to just being built out
individually-trained components), then the report's framework will
apply to them as well. ↩︎