See also their Llama 2 website here: https://ai.meta.com/llama , and their research paper here: https://ai.meta.com/research/publications/llama-2-open-foundation-and-fine-tuned-chat-models/ From their blog post: Takeaways Today, we’re introducing the availability of Llama 2, the next generation of our open source large language model. Llama 2 is free for research and commercial use. Microsoft and Meta are expanding their longstanding partnership, with Microsoft as the preferred partner for Llama 2. We’re opening access to Llama 2 with the support of a broad set of companies and people across tech, academia, and policy who also believe in an open innovation approach to today’s AI technologies. Compared to the first Llama, LLama 2 is trained for 2T tokens instead of 1.4T, has 2x the context length (4096 instead of 2048), uses Grouped Query Attention , and performs better across the board, with performance generally exceeding code-davinci-002 on benchmarks: They also release both a normal base model (Llama 2) and a RLHF'ed chat model (Llama 2-chat). Interestingly, they're only releasing the 7B/13B/70B models, and not the 34B model, "due to a lack of time to sufficiently red team". More importantly, they're releasing it both on Microsoft Azure and also making it available for commercial use. The form for requesting access is very straightforward and does not require stating what you're using it for: (EDIT: they gave me access ~20 minutes after submitting the form, seems pretty straightforward.) Note that their license is not technically free for commercial use always; it contains the following clauses: [1.] v. You will not use the Llama Materials or any output or results of the Llama Materials to improve any other large language model (excluding Llama 2 or derivative works thereof). 2. Additional Commercial Terms. If, on the Llama 2 version release date, the monthly active users of the products or services made available by or for Licensee, or Licensee’s affiliates, is greater than 700 million monthly active users in the preceding calendar month, you must request a license from Meta, which Meta may grant to you in its sole discretion, and you are not authorized to exercise any of the rights under this Agreement unless or until Meta otherwise expressly grants you such rights. See also the Llama 2 Acceptable Use Policy (which seems pretty standard).