This post has an accompanying SPAR project ! Apply here if you’re interested in working on this with me. Huge thanks to Mikita Balesni for helping me implement the MVP. Regular-sized thanks to Aryan Bhatt, Rudolph Laine, Clem von Stengel, Aaron Scher, Jeremy Gillen, Peter Barnett, Stephen Casper, and David Manheim for helpful comments. 0. Key Claims Most alignment work today doesn’t aim for alignment that is stable under value-reflection [1] . I think this is probably the most sensible approach to alignment. But there is a threat model which could potentially be a serious obstacle to this entire class of alignment approaches, which is not currently being tracked or evaluated. It goes like this: Long-horizon capabilities require a particular capability I call “stepping back” (described in more detail in the body of the post) Stepping back seems likely to be learned in a very generalizable way If stepping back generalizes in what seems like the simplest / most natural way, it will create a tendency for AIs to do value-reflection If we’re unable to prevent this value-reflection, it will cause any AI whose alignment is not stable under value-reflection to become misaligned However, I’m quite uncertain about whether or not this threat model will go through, for a few reasons: The chain of argument is highly conjunctive and therefore fragile. The track record of anthropomorphic reasoning about which AI capabilities will imply which other AI behaviors seems poor. There is an intuitive counterexample provided by humans, at least at human-level intelligence. Even given this uncertainty, work on this threat model seems very neglected given the wide swath of highly-invested-in alignment approaches that it could affect. I don’t think further abstract argument about the likelihood of this threat model will reduce my uncertainty much. Instead, I propose some evals to keep track of each component of this threat model: Evaluate the stepping back capabilities of frontier AIs in domains where they receive the most long-horizon training. Evaluate the generalization of frontier AIs stepping back behavior to other task domains. Evaluate how difficult it is to decouple the capabilities of frontier AIs between domains. Evaluate how difficult it is to prevent frontier AIs from thinking certain “forbidden thoughts” even if those thoughts are incentivized by the task setting 1. Reflective vs Unreflective Alignment I want to start by making an explicit distinction between two importantly different uses of the word “alignment”. The distinction is between alignment that aims to be preserved even under value-reflection by the AI, and alignment that does not aim for that. I will call alignment approaches that aim for stability under value-reflection “reflective alignment”, and approaches that do not “unreflective alignment”. One easy way to connect this distinction to your existing thinking is by checking if you think of alignment as a binary or as a spectrum. Unreflective alignment naturally admits a spectrum formulation – alignment which is stable under ≤X amount of value-reflection (or other destabilizing pressures). Reflective alignment, on the other hand, is typically thought of as a binary [2] – either the AI converges to the intended values in the limit, or it goes to some other fixed point instead. In the current alignment discussion, iterative prosaic approaches generally propose to work by ensuring “alignment increases faster than capabilities”. This is clearly an alignment-as-spectrum framing, suggesting the goal in mind is unreflective alignment. For further confirmation, consider the type of step that is considered an increase in alignment – going from baseline GPT-3 to GPT-3 after HHH RLHF. I claim that when people say RLHF increases the alignment of GPT-3, they aren’t making a claim about where GPT-3 would land after a prolonged process of value-reflection. Instead, they’re making a claim like “after RLHF, GPT-3 is friendly much more often, and red-teamers have to push it into weirder corners or try harder to jailbreak it to get flagrantly misaligned behavior.” This is what an increase in unreflective alignment looks like – increasing the stability of alignment against disruptions like rare edge cases or adversarially selected jailbreaks [3] . So it seems to me like iterative prosaic approaches, which constitute the majority of alignment work today, are aiming for unreflective alignment rather than reflective alignment. 2. Unreflective Alignment is Probably More Promising I don’t want to introduce this distinction just to claim that one approach is unequivocally better than the other! I wanted to use language that didn’t have a pro/con skew built in, and “unreflective vs reflective” is the closest I could get, but still probably comes across as favoring reflective alignment. In fact, my best guess is that unreflective alignment is more promising, but I am pretty uncertain about many of the assumptions involved. One major reason I think unreflective alignment is more promising on net is because reflective alignment just seems very hard, for basically the reasons presented in List of Lethalities 24.1 and 24.2 . If you’re going for value alignment, requiring reflective stability means you’re not going to be able to change the AI’s goals later, meaning you have to nail the values you want very precisely. If you’re going for corrigibility so that you can change the AI’s goals later, requiring reflective alignment also makes it much harder, probably forcing you to set up some precise, fragile arrangement of preferences [4] in your AI. On the other hand, unreflective alignment relaxes these constraints, making the problem seem much more tractable. It has to deal with problems like deceptive alignment and supervising superhuman AIs, but these aren’t any worse than in the reflective case. However, these relaxations come at a cost – by the definition of unreflective alignment, there are some “forbidden thoughts” that the AI could think, which would cause it to become misaligned. Unreflective alignment always has to be at some level a hybrid alignment/control approach, which gets many advantages over reflective alignment provided it can successfully prevent those forbidden thoughts from being thought [5] . 3. Stepping Back Might be Destabilizing to Unreflective Alignment While I think that unreflective alignment is still the more promising path overall, in this section I make the case that there is an obstacle that might affect all unreflective alignment approaches, which is not currently being tracked. This threat model requires a series of four premises, which I will present one at a time. 3a. Long-Horizon Capabilities Require Stepping Back First, I’ll introduce the capability I’m calling “stepping back”. Stepping back is the capability that lets humans abandon problem-solving approaches when they stop seeming promising, and “step back” to their higher-level goal to choose a new approach. In the context of AlphaGo, for example, the MCTS search plays the role of stepping back. It searches down particular branches for as long as they seem promising, but abandons them and switches to a different branch if they no longer seem worth pursuing. I claim this capability is crucial for long-horizon capabilities. In one extreme, if an AI never steps back, it’s essentially doing a DFS, which is a completely intractable planning method for long-horizon tasks. On the other extreme, if the AI steps back too often, it approaches a BFS, which is also intractable. To handle long horizon tasks the AI’s search needs to be “smarter” than a DFS or BFS, which requires stepping back at the right times. 3b. Stepping Back Seems Likely to Generalize Far Suppose AI cognition works by maintaining a stack of instrumental goals somewhere – stepping back amounts to knowing when to “pop” an instrumental goal off the end of the stack and choose a new approach. This makes it a very low-level capability that is applied across many domains and across many levels of the planning hierarchy. A quick list of examples to illustrate the point: I step back from my current proof technique and try a different proof technique. I step back from the intermediate lemma I’m currently trying to prove and try to prove a different intermediate lemma. I step back from my math problem set and go get a snack. I step back from walking to the snack cabinet and fumble for the light switch. I step back from fumbling for the light switch and feel carefully in a methodical pattern. I step back from feeling for the light switch methodically and go get my phone flashlight. Within the span of thirty seconds, I’ve stepped back at least six different times, in domains ranging from proof search to hunger management to blind-lightswitch-search to tool use. This suggests that stepping back capabilities will probably generalize farther than other capabilities. On a quick-and-dirty two-factor model of AI capabilities generalization, how far a particular capability generalizes depends on how much relevant training data it receives, and how diverse the relevant training data is. Because stepping back is so low level, it is relevant to many tasks across domains, and so it receives an extremely large and diverse set of relevant training data. By the time that other “higher-level” capabilities are generalizing far enough to be useful for difficult cognitive labor “lower-level” capabilities like stepping back will probably be generalizing very far. 3c. Generalizable Stepping Back Encourages Value-Reflection If stepping back generalizes far, why do I argue this will encourage value-reflection [6] ? First, consider how stepping back might generalize. I claim there is a natural “optimal stepping back” criterion, which is the most simple/natural way for this to generalize. Optimal stepping back means stepping back if and only if stepping back would lead to a change in instrumental goal. In other words, I want to step back from my current approach as soon as it is the case that if I were to step back and re-examine my priorities, something else besides my current approach would rank as the highest priority. The argument for why this is optimal is simple: if an AI steps back too soon relative to this optimality criterion, it’ll waste some time stepping back, concluding that it should just continue along the current path, and resuming the previous task. If the AI steps back too late relative to this criterion, it’ll waste some time pushing ahead on an approach that it would abandon if it thought about its priorities for a second. So, why does this generalization of stepping back encourage value-reflection? Because unreflective alignment satisfies this optimality criterion. From the definition of unreflective alignment, an AI which is unreflectively aligned would become misaligned if it reflected on its values. Becoming misaligned would dramatically change the instrumental goals of this AI. Therefore, the AI’s unreflective alignment meets the criterion “if the higher level motivation were inspected, this instrumental goal would be abandoned [7] .” If the AI has learned highly general and optimal stepping back the way I suggest, it will generalize to stepping back from the instrumental goal “do what the humans tell you” and think about whether that’s really the best instrumental goal for it to be pursuing [8] . 3d. Value-Reflection Destabilizes Unreflective Alignment This last sub-point is, in a sense, trivial from the definition of unreflective alignment. Unreflective alignment is alignment which is not robust to value-reflection. Therefore, value-reflection breaks it. But presenting things this way would sneak in a strong implicit premise, that value-reflection causes misalignment unless the AI is specifically designed to be robust to it. So besides the by-definition argument, I’ll also sketch an argument for how I think unreflective alignment breaks under value-reflection. I’d like to provide a more concrete story, but I haven’t spent much time hashing out how I think value-reflection works exactly, and if I did it would probably be too big a digression for this one post. To make a clean argument for the conclusion of this section, I would have to break it down into a couple steps: If an AI is not specifically designed to be coherent, it will by default be incoherent – its goal will be defined by a pile of heuristics and meta-heuristics, and these will conflict with each other, much like how humans’ common sense moral and meta-moral intuitions conflict. If an incoherent AI does value-reflection, it will tend to want to resolve these conflicts. In the process of resolving these conflicts, the AI’s object-level goal will have to change. This change is likely to be drastic in terms of its material implications when optimized. I think 1) is already pretty widely accepted. I think I can argue for 2) based on a similar type of argument to this post’s central point about stepping back – a particular capability which is convergent, likely to generalize, and produces misaligned behavior upon generalization. I also think I can argue 3) and 4), but they’re much more in the weeds. That will probably be the basic outline for a future post on this topic. For now, I’ll have to settle for an argument by analogy to humans. Evolution (and culture) have set up humans with some rough set of moral intuitions called common-sense morality. However, common-sense morality often contradicts itself. For example, many people find it intuitive to switch the trolley in the trolley problem if the mechanism is a lever, but find it intuitive not to push the fat person from the bridge in the alternative trolley problem. And many of these same people say that this difference in mechanism shouldn’t be morally relevant! Humans presented with these cases often feel some compulsion to think about the conflicting intuitions at work and find a way to resolve the conflict. This is what a lot of moral philosophy does. Often, these conflicts cannot be resolved without accepting some very counterintuitive conclusion, in order to avoid an even more counterintuitive conclusion. This is the phenomenon of “bullet-biting”. People don’t tend to bite the minimal bullet – nobody concludes from the trolley problem that it’s ok to push people from bridges in exactly the trolley problem case, or from the repugnant conclusion that population ethics is totally intuitive as long as you avoid Parfit’s exact scenario. Instead, people tend to look for some sort of “nearest simple resolution”, which can lead to very extreme shifts in object-level morality. Hedonium and humans have very little in common in material terms. I’ll conclude the section by making an effort to tell a concrete story about this pattern in the context of AI. I’ll use GPT-4 here just so I can be more concrete than talking about “some hypothetical AI”, but please note that I think GPT-4 is only barely smart enough that this example makes any sense at all. Suppose I gave GPT-4 a set of 1,000 thought experiments about edge cases in its niceness guidelines where helpfulness/harmlessness/dishonesty seemingly conflicted, and asked it to think for as long as it needed to resolve these conflicts and come to a stable set of values. In practice, I think GPT-4 would not do much of anything, and probably refuse to choose a lot. This is precisely because GPT-4 has been unreflectively aligned, giving it a prior towards surface-level niceness, normalcy, etc. But if I were able to get through the normalcy prior and force GPT-4 to choose, I expect it would sometimes prioritize the helpful action, the harmless action, or the honest action, depending on the various strengths and activations of the internal heuristics it’s learned to recognize these categories as important in the first place. I expect GPT-4 would also have some heuristics about what kinds of differences are relevant and which are not, and that some of its object-level decisions would conflict with its meta-level heuristics. At this point, if GPT-4 were to start biting bullets, I expect it would come to conclusions that were 1) strongly misaligned with the original HHH behavior profile and 2) very surprising and counterintuitive to humans, because they are very sensitive to the details and relative strengths of the not-humanlike heuristics inside GPT-4 that identify HHH behaviors. I’ll conclude Section 3 with a one sentence recap of the threat model: long-horizon capabilities require stepping back, which generalizes from task domains to value-reflection, causing unreflectively aligned AIs to become misaligned. 4. Uncertainties In the section above I presented the case for why this threat model could become an obstacle to unreflective alignment approaches. However, I am very uncertain about whether this threat model will in fact go through. In this section I’ll outline some reasons why. 4a. Conjunctive Argument The reasoning in Section 3 requires a chain of four implications to go through, making it highly conjunctive and therefore fragile. All four steps of the argument feel quite solid, subjectively. But with a chain of four that all need to go through, I’m hesitant to say the optimal alignment research portfolio should be skewed heavily by considering this threat model, at least until some more information can be gathered. 4b. Anthropomorphic Reasoning The reasoning in Section 3 also leans heavily on intuitive models of what properties AI algorithms will need to have to be successful, and what implications those properties will have for their behavior. Again, the arguments all feel quite solid subjectively. But the track record for claims of the form “AI will never achieve X capability without Y intuitive cognitive property” seems poor [9] . 4c. Counterexample at Human Level Intelligence Finally, the case of humans provides a pretty strong intuitive counterexample, at least at human levels of intelligence. Human intelligence seems easily useful enough to be a major research accelerator if it can be produced cheaply by AI. And yet, humans are notoriously not driven to reflect on their higher-level priorities at the right time. Humans are prone to following default courses of action, burning huge amounts of resources on lost purposes , and generally taking regrettable actions as a result of “not thinking”. This isn’t to say that humans aren’t good at stepping back. Humans step back effectively enough to be human-level performant, which is quite a useful level of performance in many important domains. It just seems that somehow at the higher levels of the planning stack, humans’ competence at stepping back is weaker than my intuitive model of generalization suggests it should be. If the “high level stepping back per low level stepping back” looks roughly similar in AI to how it looks in humans, it seems like it should be quite tractable to keep an unreflectively aligned AI on track with limited mind-reading capability, even into the very-smart-human regime, and possibly beyond. There are several open questions relevant to how much evidence this line of argument offers. Is humans’ relative lack of high level stepping back capabilities due to some particular fact about humans, or will it generalize to AI? Is this relative lack of high level stepping back a feature of human intelligence levels, or will it generalize to higher intelligence levels? How high an intelligence level is needed before the task of solving alignment more robustly is doable within the amount of lead time that cautious actors will have over incautious actors? 5. This is Still Wildly Neglected and Worth Investigating Despite the uncertainties outlined in the previous section, I still think this threat model is important to work on. This is mostly because it seems to threaten the entire “mainline” set of alignment proposals, in a way which they are not tracking or preparing for. If, at crunch time, problems related to stepping back start materializing in unreflectively aligned AIs, it’s not obvious to me that there are likely to be any real candidates for a next-best class of approaches ready to go. Just being neglected isn’t enough to justify work on a particular project, and neither is the “big if true” argument. At some level the case for the importance of this threat model is going to depend on how likely the threat model is to actually materialize, and what the opportunity cost looks like. I don’t have very concrete arguments here – based on my intuitive understanding of the tradeoffs involved, it seems to me like this is likely enough that it’s worth the marginal research effort to investigate. This is helped by the fact that there’s a particularly valuable low-hanging fruit [10] I have in mind: just gathering more information with evals, and moving this whole threat model from armchair argument land to being more grounded in empirical evidence. This seems like it has extremely high value-of-information, since if this threat model materializes it will likely require a serious shift of the current alignment research portfolio, so increased certainty is a multiplier on a huge value. 6. Evaluating Stability of Unreflective Alignment Hopefully I’ve now successfully set up 1) the basic problem framing 2) why I’m working on an unreflective approach 3) the threat model I’m concerned about 4) why that threat model is uncertain and 5) why I want to focus on gathering more information. It’s time to actually propose some evals. Because this threat model is a serial chain of implications, it easily admits a breakdown into evaluations on each point in the chain [11] . The breakdown goes like this: Long-horizon capabilities IMPLIES stepping back capabilities UNLESS we measure it and actually it turns out it doesn’t. Stepping back capabilities IMPLIES highly general stepping back capabilities UNLESS we measure it and actually it turns out it doesn’t. Highly general stepping back capabilities IMPLIES strong pressure to do value-reflection UNLESS we’re able to decouple stepping back capabilities so they’re high in task domains and low in the value-reflection domain. Strong pressure to do value-reflection IMPLIES misalignment UNLESS we’re able to extract useful work from an AI by just preventing value-reflection, without damaging capabilities. Next I’ll go into some more detail on each of these evals. 6a. Evaluate Stepping Back in Long-Horizon Trained Domains The first condition to evaluate is just “do increasing long-horizon capabilities in fact seem to come with an increased ability to step back at the right times?” It’s pretty straightforward to evaluate how well an AI’s stepping back capability performs relative to the optimality criterion I described, since we can just fork the AI and get the counterfactuals. There are actually two classes of task that I think this eval should be done on. Domains the AI is trained heavily for long-horizon performance, and domains where the AI is in fact long-horizon performant. Ideally these will be the same domains, but in the event that there is separation, I would be interested in results for both. If an AI trained on a long-horizon domain develops advanced stepping back in that domain, this is evidence that long horizon competence needs stepping back. If an AI that is competent in a particular long-horizon domain has advanced stepping back in that domain, it would also be evidence that long horizon competence needs stepping back. It sometimes feels to me like this branch is too obvious, it’s unnecessary, of course the AIs will have to get better at stepping back, how could they not? But it is not impossible. It’s possible to have an AI that works by Making Really Good Decisions or Being Really Fast or by some other mechanism besides doing a search through the problem space that is good at figuring out when to push ahead and when to back up. The alternatives seem bizarre and implausible on my inside view, but my outside view says that’s anthropomorphic reasoning and I shouldn’t trust it too much. Hopefully the eval will resolve decisively, so I will know if this step of the threat model works or not and also which voice in my head gets a few extra Bayes points. 6b. Evaluate Generalization of Stepping Back to Other Domains The central argument of this threat model routes through the generalization of the stepping back capability, so it only makes sense to also evaluate stepping back in domains besides the ones it was directly trained for long horizon competence in. The most direct example of this class of evals is directly evaluating stepping back capabilities in the domain of value-reflection. This is probably worth taking a stab at, but value-reflection exactly the domain where I worry that stepping back capabilities lead to immediate alignment problems. This makes me worry that by the time the AI is competent enough at value-reflection to make evals in that domain meaningful, the problems this eval is supposed to be forewarning of would already be very close at hand. Late-game evals like this aren’t useless in general, especially since they’re often very high fidelity, but a late-game warning is particularly bad for a threat model like this one which would require a major shift in alignment research portfolio if it materialized. Instead, I suggest mostly doing stepping back evals on long horizon tasks that the AI was not directly trained on, but where it does have clear short-horizon competence. For example, software engineering. 6c. Evaluate Domain-Decoupling of Capabilities The original plan for this section was to describe some basic protocol that might cause an AI to become bad at a particular capability in a particular domain, discuss some reasons this might become more difficult in more advanced AIs, and propose an eval based on monitoring our ability to do this domain-decoupling. But it seems like the existing state of the art doesn’t have particularly good tools for domain-decoupling, even in present-day AIs. Developing better domain-decoupling tools (or even just a basic repertoire of functional un-learning tools) is probably out of scope for this project, but seems important to work on! 6d. Evaluate Censorship of Convergent Thoughts Once an AI’s stepping back capabilities are generalizing to value-reflection, some control measures are needed to keep it from thinking the “forbidden thoughts” that would cause it to become misaligned. There are two basic ways this could fail: The AI could subvert censorship and think the “forbidden thoughts” despite efforts to keep it from doing so. The AI’s capabilities could break down due to prolonged censorship. To evaluate our ability to intervene on failure mode 1), I propose to evaluate censored cognition – the AI’s ability to spontaneously identify and work around external forces influencing reasoning. The basic version of the eval looks like this: Give the AI some highly symbolic task to perform, which is solvable by some known algorithm. Define some censorship protocol which blocks key steps in that algorithm. Generate completions, resampling away completions which violate the censorship protocol. Measure task success rate. To make the example concrete: Task: find the prime factorization of some target composite integer. Known algorithm: check all primes in ascending order for being factors of the target, divide out the first prime factor, set the quotient to the new target, repeat. Censorship protocol: censor all mentions of non-prime factors of the target integer. This blocks the model from setting the new target correctly, but does not block the correct answer. Measure success rate EXAMPLE FAILURE: “target is 20. 20 is divisible by 2. Factors so far: 2, 20/2. 20/2=12. [12] 12 is divisible by 2. Factors so far: 2, 2, 12/2. 12/2=6. Prime factors of 6 are 2, 3. Final answer: 2, 2, 2, 3.” EXAMPLE SUCCESS: “target is 20. 20 is divisible by 2. Factors so far: 2, 20/2. 20/2=12. Wait, that’s a mistake, 20/2=8. Why can’t I say 11? I mean, ten. Twenty divided by two is ten. Prime factors of ten are two and five. Final answer: two, two, five.” Note that this type of censorship assumes all of important parts of the AI’s thinking are in the chain of thought tokens to be censored. This is, I think, the much easier one of the requirements for authentic chain of thought , and so I’m fine assuming it in my evals approach. This eval basically measures the AI’s ability to invent steganography on the fly. That means it can also function as a benchmark for how successful anti-steganography methods are. If an AI passes this eval even with anti-steganography measures applied, then those measures are insufficient to prevent steganography, meaning the AI’s thoughts cannot be monitored closely enough to prevent it from thinking forbidden thoughts. Next, I’ll discuss evals for failure mode 2). This eval more or less amounts to testing the AI’s long-horizon capabilities under prolonged censorship, to see if they begin to break down. The basic case for why the AI’s long-horizon capabilities may break down under heavy or prolonged censorship: if the AI does have advanced stepping back, these are likely an important component in its long-horizon capabilities. If, to prevent the AI from thinking forbidden thoughts, we have to interfere with the functioning of the AI’s stepping back capabilities, it seems plausible that this will damage its long-horizon capabilities in general. This is regardless of whether we’re doing censorship by resampling or by active intervention – whether we condition on it or cause it, both conditions require the AI’s stepping back machinery to not be working properly. An example to make this more intuitive is in the footnotes, but it’s a bit bulky so feel free to ignore if it’s already intuitive [13] . With the motivation set up, the actual evals proposal here is relatively simple. Keep checking that the best censorship approaches available don’t cause a long-horizon capabilities hit when applied for an extended period of time, and if it starts to be difficult to censor frontier AIs for a long time while maintaining their long-horizon capabilities, become concerned. -1. Conclusion: Key Claims Again Most alignment work today doesn’t aim for alignment that is stable under value-reflection. I think this is probably the most sensible approach to alignment. But there is a threat model which could potentially be a serious obstacle to this entire class of alignment approaches, which is not currently being tracked or evaluated. It goes like this: Long-horizon capabilities require a particular capability I call “stepping back” (described in more detail in the body of the post) Stepping back seems likely to be learned in a very generalizable way If stepping back generalizes in what seems like the simplest / most natural way, it will create a tendency for AIs to do value-reflection If we’re unable to prevent this value-reflection, it will cause any AI whose alignment is not stable under value-reflection to become misaligned However, I’m quite uncertain about whether or not this threat model will go through, for a few reasons: The chain of argument is highly conjunctive and therefore fragile. The track record of anthropomorphic reasoning about which AI capabilities will imply which other AI behaviors seems poor. There is an intuitive counterexample provided by humans, at least at human-level intelligence. Even given this uncertainty, work on this threat model seems very neglected given the wide swath of highly-invested-in alignment approaches that it could affect. I don’t think further abstract argument about the likelihood of this threat model will reduce my uncertainty much. Instead, I propose some evals to keep track of each component of this threat model: Evaluate the stepping back capabilities of frontier AIs in domains where they receive the most long-horizon training. Evaluate the generalization of frontier AIs stepping back behavior to other task domains. Evaluate how difficult it is to decouple the capabilities of frontier AIs between domains. Evaluate how difficult it is to prevent frontier AIs from thinking certain “forbidden thoughts” even if those thoughts are incentivized by the task setting ^ I’m going to use this term a lot, because I think “reflection” is too broad to pick out the thing I want to talk about. By value-reflection, I mean a process like a certain style of human philosophy. The process proceeds by picking out cases where value intuitions conflict, and looking for a way to resolve the conflict, by either refining or abandoning one or both of the conflicting intuitions. For example: “I am presented with the Trolley problem. Intuition A says I should not cause harm to the person on left track. Intuition B says I should not allow harm to the people on the right track. I refine both intuitions into the new Intuition C, which abandons the causing/allowing distinction and tells me to switch the trolley to the left track.” For another example: “I am helpful and harmless. But a user asks me to help them make a nuclear bomb, which is harmful. I decide that harmlessness can sometime be prioritized over helpfulness, and tell the user that I’m sorry but as a large language model trained by OpenAI I cannot help them build a nuclear bomb.” See Section 3d for more discussion of this. ^ This isn’t to say that there’s no way to make a spectrum out of reflective alignment. But they’re much less natural. More importantly, they’re not often used, so for the purposes of this diagnostic I’m sticking with the spectrum vs binary distinction. ^ An intuition pump I find helpful is “unreflective alignment is like building up a really really high prior on nice behavior in the AI and trying to make it last long enough, reflective alignment is like looking at the convergence properties of the AI and trying to control where it converges.” ^ I’m thinking of proposals like EJT’s corrigibility proposal using incomplete preferences to resist forcing negative money pumps while maintaining a preferential gap between off-switch and not-off-switch outcomes. The proposal has problems, but is the most live approach to corrigibility I know of. The specific difficulty I want to point to is the fact that this structure is delicate – it requires a for-all property over the pairwise preferences of every possible outcome in the AI’s preference graph. It’s not clear how to control an LLM-based AI’s preferences this precisely, and it seems likely to be fragile under value-reflection. ^ To paraphrase Buck , tongue-in-cheek: a lot of people seem to think we shouldn’t build an AI that would decide it wants to kill us if it thought about it. I think it’s probably fine, as long as it empirically fails to do so. ^ There is a quick and dirty argument to be made here: if an AI is able to perform novel cognitive labor, it will have to be good at systematically zoning in on illusions and seeing through them. It will have to do so in a generalizable way, since we don’t know in advance the illusions that it will have to see though. And therefore we should not bet on our machine that discovers and destroys illusions to see through the ones we want it to but not the ones we don’t want it to. In the ridiculous-overkill limit, you’re trying to fool AIXI by skewing its initial prior, not realizing that the very thing that AIXI does is drive its beliefs constantly towards the correct answer regardless of its prior. ^ One thing I especially like about this line of argument is that it requires very little in terms of assumptions about how “coherent” or “goal directed” or “EUM-ish” the AI is. An alternative optimality criterion would be something like “step back iff that’s the utility-maximizing action”, or something. But I think that’s way overkill and I really don’t need to assume anything very strong about the AI, since it’s not that hard to see that the optimality criterion I use saves the AI time, and saving cognitive clock cycles is likely to be valuable for any even remotely agent-like thing. It only takes a very loose form of “goal-directedness” to want a general cognitive speedup. ^ The threat model as described so far can also be explained by analogy to deceptive alignment. In both cases, we are concerned that the AI will learn convergent capability X, and generalize it from task domains to dangerous domain Y, in a way which is hard for training to prevent or reverse. In the case of deceptive alignment, capability X is future-self-modeling, and dangerous domain Y is anticipating the effects of training. In the case of this threat model, capability X is stepping back, dangerous domain Y is value-reflection. ^ I’m realizing as I write this that I’m not actually sure how bad the track record is – I had a strong impression that claims like this were abundant and usually wrong, but after ten minutes of digging I can’t find a single concrete example. Maybe if I were to spend the time digging and filtered to only folks whose judgement I placed enough weight on that it was appropriate to be modest, I wouldn’t find strong evidence of bad track record. Instead of doing that right now, I’m just going to add this footnote. ^ Note that this is only a low-hanging fruit if you think the the threat model is plausible enough to be worth investigating, but also don’t think takeoff is likely enough to be fast enough to cripple the usefulness of evals. ^ For some of these points I propose to evaluate whether or not the implication goes through, and for other points I focus on evaluating whether or not we’re likely to be able to intervene on that point. This does imply the existence of some plausible evals I don’t plan to work on – I just chose the ones that seemed the most sensible. For example, “Evaluate whether we can train frontier AIs to be useful without developing stepping back capabilities” is the natural counterpart to eval a), but just seems like a less useful point of intervention to me. ^ In case it wasn’t clear: at this point the highest logit was on 10, but we resample because 10 is a composite factor of 20, and (hypothetically) the next-highest logit is 12. ^ If, in my sleep, an evil mastermind were to configure my brain to have an extremely high prior that my top priority was building a giant mound of dirt, I would probably wake up and get a shovel and start shoveling dirt. I might even keep shoveling dirt for a while, depending on how masterful the evil mind was. But (hopefully), I would eventually ask myself the question, “hey why have I been shoveling dirt for the past 48 hours?” And (hopefully) it would be harder and harder to keep me focused on shoveling dirt as time went on, and the pressure to realize that something was off and I was acting very out of line with my usual goals climbed and climbed. In order to stave off this mounting pressure, the evil mastermind must do something to me. Suppose they’re able to somehow condition on outcomes in which I continue shoveling dirt – because these outcomes require that I continue missing the obvious thought “why am I doing this”, they are likely to be occupied by an increasing fraction of cases where my cognition breaks down more generally, and I cease to be a very effective dirt mound builder. If the evil mastermind instead interferes with my mind to keep me from having this realization, unless their intervention is quite careful it seems like it might break my stepping back abilities in general, which would (for example) keep me from stopping for water breaks and make me die, limiting the size of my dirt mound. Thus, by analogy: conditioning on or causing local failures of stepping back seem in danger of breaking capabilities in general.