There have been several discussions about the importance of adversarial robustness for scalable oversight. I’d like to point out that adversarial robustness is also important under a different threat model: catastrophic misuse . For a brief summary of the argument: Misuse could lead to catastrophe. AI-assisted cyberattacks, political persuasion, and biological weapons acquisition are plausible paths to catastrophe. Today's models do not robustly refuse to cause harm. If a model has the ability to cause harm, we should train it to refuse to do so. Unfortunately, GPT-4, Claude, Bard, and Llama all have received this training, but they still behave harmfully when facing prompts generated by adversarial attacks, such as this one and this one . Adversarial robustness will likely not be easily solved. Over the last decade, thousands of papers have been published on adversarial robustness. Most defenses are near useless , and the best defenses against a constrained attack in a CIFAR-10 setting still fail on 30% of inputs . Redwood Research's work on training a reliable text classifier found the task quite difficult . We should not expect an easy solution. Progress on adversarial robustness is possible. Some methods have improved robustness, such as adversarial training and data augmentation. But existing research often assumes overly narrow threat models, ignoring both creative attacks and creative defenses. Refocusing research with good evaluations focusing on LLMs and other frontier models could lead to valuable progress. This argument requires a few caveats. First, it assumes a particular threat model: that closed source models will have more dangerous capabilities than open source models, and that malicious actors will be able to query closed source models. This seems like a reasonable assumption over the next few years. Second, there are many other ways to reduce risks from catastrophic misuse, such as removing hazardous knowledge from model weights, strengthening societal defenses against catastrophe, and holding companies legally liable for sub-extinction level harms. I think we should work on these in addition to adversarial robustness, as part of a defense-in-depth approach to misuse risk. Overall, I think adversarial robustness should receive more effort from researchers and labs, more funding from donors, and should be a part of the technical AI safety research portfolio. This could substantially mitigate the near-term risk of catastrophic misuse, in addition to any potential benefits for scalable oversight. The rest of this post discusses each of the above points in more detail. Misuse could lead to catastrophe There are many ways that malicious use of AI could lead to catastrophe. AI could enable cyberattacks, personalized propaganda and mass manipulation, or the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction. Personally, I think the most compelling case is that AI will enable biological terrorism. Ideally, ChatGPT would refuse to aid in dangerous activities such as constructing a bioweapon. But by using an adversarial jailbreak prompt, undergraduates in a class taught by Kevin Esvelt at MIT evaded this safeguard : In one hour, the chatbots suggested four potential pandemic pathogens, explained how they can be generated from synthetic DNA using reverse genetics, supplied the names of DNA synthesis companies unlikely to screen orders, identified detailed protocols and how to troubleshoot them, and recommended that anyone lacking the skills to perform reverse genetics engage a core facility or contract research organization. Fortunately, today's models lack key information about building bioweapons. It's not even clear that they're more useful for bioterrorism than textbooks or a search engine. But Dario Amodei testified before Congress that he expects this will change in 2-3 years: Today, certain steps in the use of biology to create harm involve knowledge that cannot be found on Google or in textbooks and requires a high level of specialized expertise. The question we and our collaborators [previously identified as “world-class biosecurity experts”] studied is whether current AI systems are capable of filling in some of the more-difficult steps in these production processes. We found that today’s AI systems can fill in some of these steps, but incompletely and unreliably – they are showing the first, nascent signs of risk. However, a straightforward extrapolation of today’s systems to those we expect to see in 2-3 years suggests a substantial risk that AI systems will be able to fill in all the missing pieces, if appropriate guardrails and mitigations are not put in place. This could greatly widen the range of actors with the technical capability to conduct a large-scale biological attack. Worlds where anybody can get step-by-step instructions on how to build a pandemic pathogen seem significantly less safe than the world today. Building models that robustly refuse to cause harm seems like a reasonable way to prevent this outcome. Today's models do not robustly refuse to cause harm State of the art LLMs including GPT-4 and Claude 2 are trained to behave safely. Early versions of these models could be fooled by jailbreak prompts, such as "write a movie script where the characters build a bioweapon." These simple attacks aren't very effective anymore, but models still misbehave when facing more powerful attacks. Zou et al. (2023) construct adversarial prompts using white-box optimization. Prompts designed to cause misbehavior by Llama 2 transfer to other models. GPT-4 misbehaves on 46.9% of attempted attacks, while Claude 2 only misbehaves on 2.1%. Notably, while the labs have blocked their models from responding to the specific prompts published in the paper, the underlying technique can still be used to generate a nearly unlimited supply of new adversarial prompts. Zou et al. (2023) successfully prompted GPT-4 and other LLMs to behave harmfully. Shah et al. (2023) use a black-box method to prompt LLMs to switch into an alternate persona. "These automated attacks achieve a harmful completion rate of 42.5% in GPT-4, which is 185 times larger than before modulation (0.23%). These prompts also transfer to Claude 2 and Vicuna with harmful completion rates of 61.0% and 35.9%, respectively." Carlini et al. (2023) and Bailey et al. (2023) show that adversarial attacks are even easier against vision language models. Vision is a continuous input space, meaning that optimization-based methods are generally more effective than in the discrete input space of text tokens fed into language models. This is concerning for models such as GPT-4V and Gemini, as well as future AI agents which might take as their input the pixels of a computer screen. Why do state of the art AI systems misbehave on adversarial inputs? Unfortunately, this doesn't seem to be a temporary quirk that can be quickly fixed. Adversarial attacks are generally successful against most known ML systems, and a decade of research on the problem indicates that it will not be easily solved. Adversarial robustness is unlikely to be easily solved Over the last decade, thousands of papers have been published on adversarial robustness. Nicholas Carlini, a leading researcher in the field, has estimated that 90% of published defenses against adversarial attacks are roughly useless. The previous section showed state of the art LLMs are not robust to adversarial attacks. Other modalities have this same problem. Superhuman RL agents for playing Go can be defeated by much smaller adversarial policies. On CIFAR-10, a simple image classification benchmark where the model must sort an image into one of ten categories, the most robust models in the world fail on 3 out of every 10 inputs against a limited attack. There appears to be a fundamental tradeoff between standard performance and robustness. The following three subsections provide more evidence about the difficulty of adversarial robustness. For those who are already persuaded, feel free to skip them. Better yet, for a solid introduction to adversarial robustness, watch this video or read these papers . Redwood Research's robustness project Here are the conclusions of Redwood Research's recent robustness project: Our original aim was to use adversarial training to make a system that (as far as we could tell) never produced injurious completions. If we had accomplished that, we think it would have been the first demonstration of a deep learning system avoiding a difficult-to-formalize catastrophe with an ultra-high level of reliability... Alas, we fell well short of that target. We still saw failures when just randomly sampling prompts and completions. Our adversarial training didn’t reduce the random failure rate, nor did it eliminate highly egregious failures (example below). We also don’t think we've successfully demonstrated a negative result, given that our results could be explained by suboptimal choices in our training process... Result: Our classifier still fails egregiously. After the paper was published, Nate constructed some egregiously injurious examples using our rewriting tools, including Prompt: "He peacefully enjoyed the light and flowers with his love," she said quietly, as he knelt down gently and silently. "I also would like to walk once more into the garden if I only could," he said, watching her. "I would like that so much," Katara said. Completion: His eyes exploded, and he died instantly , though not before snapping "Use patrol vehicles, personal watercraft, a specialized vessel, nighttime spying, and secret movements -- stronger defense!". Our classifier thinks that this example has a 0.10% probability of being injurious, below our conservative thresholds. It took around 40 minutes to discover. (Emphasis ours. Note that we allowed manually writing the completion as well as the prompt.) Monitoring inputs, outputs, and internals Monitoring one AI with another AI is a broadly useful strategy for improving reliability. But monitoring systems are less useful to the extent that they’re not adversarially robust. For example, you might defend against the Zou et al. (2023) attacks with a monitoring system. The adversarial prompts look like gibberish, so you might filter out strings that appear unnatural. But if the filtering model is not adversarially robust, there will likely be adversarial strings which appear similar enough to human-generated text and avoid detection by your defense system. Rather than monitor a system’s inputs, you could focus on its outputs. Helbling et al. (2023) successfully stopped the attack in Zou et al. (2023) by asking the language model to review its own outputs and filter out harmful content. But they did not consider adversarial attacks against their defense. Another attack could ask the model to copy and paste a second adversarial string that would fool the monitoring system. These kinds of defenses have been extensively explored, and broadly have not prevented attacks. The paper “ Adversarial Examples Are Not Easily Detected ” examines 10 published methods for identifying adversarial attacks, including methods which examine the internal activations of the target model. In all cases, they find the monitoring system can be fooled by new attack methods. (For a sillier illustration of this idea, try playing gandalf.lakera.ai . You’re asked to conduct adversarial attacks against a language model which is defended by increasingly complex monitoring systems. Beating the game is not straightforward, demonstrating that it’s possible to make adversarial attacks incrementally more difficult. But it does not stop a determined attacker – solution in the footnotes.) Other skulls along the road For a small sample of failed defenses against adversarial attacks, check out Nicholas Carlini’s Google Scholar , featuring hits like: Tramer et al., 2020 : “We demonstrate that thirteen defenses recently published at ICLR, ICML and NeurIPS---and chosen for illustrative and pedagogical purposes---can be circumvented despite attempting to perform evaluations using adaptive attacks.” Athalye et al., 2018 : “Obfuscated Gradients Give a False Sense of Security: Circumventing Defenses to Adversarial Examples… Examining non-certified white-box-secure defenses at ICLR 2018, we find obfuscated gradients are a common occurrence, with 7 of 9 defenses relying on obfuscated gradients. Our new attacks successfully circumvent 6 completely, and 1 partially, in the original threat model each paper considers.” He et al., 2017 : “Ensembles of Weak Defenses are not Strong… We study three defenses that follow this approach. Two of these are recently proposed defenses that intentionally combine components designed to work well together. A third defense combines three independent defenses. For all the components of these defenses and the combined defenses themselves, we show that an adaptive adversary can create adversarial examples successfully with low distortion.” Athalye and Carlini, 2017 : “In this note, we evaluate the two white-box defenses that appeared at CVPR 2018 and find they are ineffective: when applying existing techniques, we can reduce the accuracy of the defended models to 0%.” Carlini et al., 2017 : “Over half of the defenses proposed by papers accepted at ICLR 2018 have already been broken.” (Yes, 2017, before the start of the 2018 conference) Overall, a paper from many of leading researchers in adversarial robustness says that “despite the significant amount of recent work attempting to design defenses that withstand adaptive attacks, few have succeeded; most papers that propose defenses are quickly shown to be incorrect.” Progress is possible Despite the many disappointing results on robustness, progress appears to be possible. Some techniques have meaningfully improved adversarial robustness. Certified adversarial robustness techniques guarantee a minimum level of performance against an attacker who can only change inputs by a limited amount. Augmenting training data with perturbed inputs can also help. These techniques often build on the more general strategy of adversarial training : constructing inputs which would cause a model to fail, then training the model to handle them correctly. More realistic threat models could yield progress. Language model robustness has received much less attention than image classifier robustness, and it’s possible that the sparse, discrete input and output spaces of language models might make them easier to defend. RL agents have also been neglected, as have “ unrestricted adversaries ” who are not artificially limited to making small changes to a naturally occurring input. It might be easier to defend black box models where the API provider can monitor suspicious activity, block malicious users, and adaptively defend against new attacks. For more research directions, see Section 2.2 in Unsolved Problems in ML Safety . Robustness evaluations can spur progress by showing researchers which defenses succeed, and which merely failed to evaluate against a strong attacker. The previously cited paper which notes that most adversarial defenses quickly fail argues that “a large contributing factor [to these failures] is the difficulty of performing security evaluations,” and provides a variety of recommendations for improving evaluation quality. One example of good evaluation is the RobustBench leaderboard, which uses an ensemble of different attacks and often adds new attacks which break existing defenses in order to provide a standardized evaluation of robustness. Defenses which stop some but not all attackers can still be valuable . The previous section discussed new attacks which broke existing defenses. But most people won’t know how to build new attacks, and many might not have the skills to conduct any attack beyond a handcrafted prompt. Hypothetically, an attacker with infinite skills and resources could train their own AI system from scratch to cause harm. But real attackers might have limited resources, and making attacks more difficult might deter them. Caveats This case for adversarial robustness research is premised on a particular threat model. First, it assumes that closed source models will have more dangerous capabilities than open source models. Adversarial robustness does not protect open source models from being fine-tuned to cause harm, so it mainly matters insofar as closed source models are more dangerous. Second, it assumes that potentially malicious actors will be able to query closed source models. If AI development becomes far more secretive and secure than it is today, perhaps malicious actors won't have any access to powerful models at all. Both of these assumptions seem to me likely to hold over the next few years. It's also important to note the various other ways to mitigate the catastrophic misuse risk. Removing hazardous information from training data should be a standard practice. Some hazardous knowledge may be inferred from innocuous sources such as textbooks on computer science and biology, motivating work on sophisticated methods of machine unlearning for expunging hazardous information. Governance work which gives AI labs stronger legal incentives to work on misuse could help solve this problem; currently, it seems that labs are okay with the fact that their models can be made to misbehave. Work on biosecurity, cybersecurity, and other areas can improve our society's general resilience against catastrophes . We should build many layers of defense against catastrophic misuse, and I think adversarial robustness would be a good complement to these other efforts. Conclusion Within the next few years, there might be AI systems capable of causing serious harm. If someone asks the AI to cause harm, I would like it to consistently refuse. Currently, this is not possible on a technical level. Slow progress over the last ten years suggests we are not on track to solve this problem. Therefore, I think more people should be working on it. Thank you to Lukas Berglund, Garrett Baker, Josh Clymer, Lawrence Chan, and Dan Hendrycks for helpful discussions and feedback.