Note: I now consider this post deprecated and instead recommend this updated version. Goodhart's curse is a neologism by Eliezer Yudkowsky stating that "neutrally optimizing a proxy measure U of V seeks out upward divergence of U from V." It is related to many near by concepts (e.g. the tails come apart , winner's curse , optimizer's curse , regression to the mean , overfitting , edge instantiation , goodhart's law ). I claim that there are three main mechanisms through which Goodhart's curse operates. Goodhart's Curse Level 1 (regressing to the mean): We are trying to optimize the value of V , but since we cannot observe V , we instead optimize a proxy U , which is an unbiased estimate of V . When we select for points with a high U value, we will be biased towards points for which U is an overestimate of V . As a simple example imagine V and E (for error) are independently normally distributed with mean 0 and variance 1, and U = V + E . If we sample many points and take the one with the largest U value, we can predict that E will likely be positive for this point, and thus the U value will predictably be an overestimate of the V value. In many cases, (like the one above) the best you can do without observing V is still to take the largest U value you can find, but you should still expect that this U value overestimates V . Similarly, if U is not necessarily an unbiased estimator of V , but U and V are correlated, and you sample a million points and take the one with the highest U value, you will end up with a V value on average strictly less than if you could just take a point with a one in a million V value directly. Goodhart's Curse Level 2 (optimizing away the correlation): Here, we assume U and V are correlated on average, but there may be different regions in which this correlation of stronger or weaker. When we optimize U to be very high, we zoom in on the region of very large U values. This region could in principle have very small V values. As a very simple example imagine U is integer uniform between 0 and 1000 inclusive, and V is equal to U mod 1000. Overall, U and V are correlated. The point where U is 1000 and V is 0 is an outlier, but it is only one point and does not sway the correlation that much. However, when we apply a lot of optimization pressure, we through away all the points with low U values, and left with a small number of extreme points. Since this is a small number of points, the correlation between U and V says little about what value V will take. Another more realistic example is that U and V are two correlated dimensions in a multivariate normal distribution, but we cut off the normal distribution to only include the disk of points in which U 2 + V 2 < n for some large n . This example represents a correlation between U and V in naturally occurring points, but also a boundary around what types of feasible that need not respect this correlation. Imagine you were to sample k points in the above example and take the one with the largest U value. As you increase k , at first, this optimization pressure lets you find better and better points for both U and V , but as you increase k to infinity, eventually you sample so many points that you will find a point near U = √ n , V = 0 . When enough optimization pressure was applied, the correlation between U and V stopped mattering, and instead the boundary of what kinds of points were possible at all decided what kind of point was selected. Goodhart's Curse Level 3 (adversarial correlations): Here we are selecting a world with a high U value because we want a would with a high V value, and we believe U to a good proxy for V . However, there is another agent who wants to optimize some other value W . Assume that W and V are contradictory. Points with hight W value necessarily have low V value, since the demand using similar resources. Since you are using U as a proxy, this other agent is incentivized to make U and W correlated as much as it can. It wants to cause your process which selects a large U value to also select a large W value (and thus a small V value). Making U and W correlated may be difficult, but thanks to Level 2 of Goodhart's Curse, the adversary need only make them correlated at the extreme values of U . For example if you run an company, and you have an programmer employee that you want to create a working product ( V ). You incentivize the employee by selecting for or rewarding employees that produce a large number of lines of code ( U ). The employee wants you to pay him to slack off all day ( W ). W and V are contradictory. The employee is incentivized to make worlds with high U also have high W , and thus have low V . Thus, the employee may adversarially write a script to generate a bunch of random lines of code that do nothing, giving himself more time to slack off. Level 3 is the thing most behind the original Goodhart's Law (although level 2 contributes as well.) Level 3 also is the mechanism behind a superintelligent AI making a Treacherous Turn . Here, V is doing what the human's want forever. U is doing what the humans want before in the training cases where the AI does not have enough power to take over, and W is whatever the AI wants to do with the universe. Finally, Level 3 is also behind the malignancy of the universal prior , where you want to predict well forever (V), so hypotheses might predict well for a while (U), so that they can manipulate the world with their future predictions (W).