There are two aspects to the Goodhart problem which are often conflated. One is trivially true for all proxy-true utility pairs; but the other is not. Following this terminology , we'll say that V is the true goal, and U is the proxy. In the range of circumstances we're used to, U ≈ V - that's what's makes U a good proxy. Then the Goodhart problem has two aspects to it: Maximising U does not increase V as much as maximising V would. When strongly maximising U , V starts to increase at a slower rate, and ultimately starts decreasing. Aspect 1. is a tautology: the best way to maximise V is to... maximise V . Hence maximising U is almost certainly less effective at increasing V than maximising V directly. But aspect 2. is not a tautology, and need not be true for generic proxy-true utility pairs ( U , V ) . For instance, some pairs have the reverse Goodhart problem : When strongly maximising U , V starts to increase at a faster rate, and ultimately starts increasing more than twice as fast as U . Are there utility functions that have anti-Goodhart problems? Yes, many. If ( U , V ) have a Goodhart problem, then ( U , V ′ ) has an anti-Goodhart problem if V ′ = 2 U − V . Then in the range of circumstances we're used to, U = 2 U − U ≈ 2 U − V = V ′ . And, as V starts growing slower than U , V ′ starts growing faster; when V starts decreasing, V ′ starts growing more than twice as fast as U : Are there more natural utility functions that have anti-Goodhart problems? Yes. If for instance you're a total or average utilitarian, and you maximise the proxy " do the best for the worst off ". In general, if V is your true utility and U is a prioritarian/conservative version of V (eg U = − e − V or U = log ( V ) or other concave, increasing functions) then we have reverse Goodhart behaviour [1] . So saying that we expect Goodhart problems (in the second sense) means that we know something special about V (and U ). It's not a generic problem for all utility functions, but for the ones we expect to correspond to human preferences. We also need to scale the proxy so that V ≈ U on the typical range of circumstances; thus the conservatism of U is only visible away from the typical range. ↩︎